Department of Economics and Finance Working Paper No. 2314 Economics and Finance Working Paper Series Guglielmo Maria Caporale, Amir Imeri and Luis A. Persistence in the Cryptocurrency Market: The Impact of the Covid-19 Pandemic and of the

Persistence in the Cryptocurrency Market: The Impact of the Covid-19 Pandemic and of the Russia-Ukraine War Guglielmo Maria Caporale1, Amir Imeri2, Luis A. Gil-Alana3 1Brunel University London, London, UK; Email address: guglielmo- 2University for Business and Technology, Pristina, Kosovo Email address: amir.imeri@ubt- 3University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain and Universidad Francisco de Vitoria, Madrid, Spain; Email address: alana@unav.es; Orcid: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5760-3123 This paper uses fractional integration methods to analyse persistence in the five cryptocurrencies with the highest degree of market capitalization (Bitcoin, Ethereum, Tether, BNB and USD Coin), and also the possible impact of both the Covid-19 pandemic and the Russia-Ukraine war. The findings suggest mean reversion in the case of the USD Coin, an explosive pattern in the case of BNB, and anti-persistence in the case of Tether. The unit root null hypothesis cannot be rejected in the case of Bitcoin, Ethereum and USD Coin, whilst it is rejected in favour of d > 1 in the case of BNB (where d is the fractional differencing parameter measuring persistence). Finally, there is not much evidence that either the Covid-19 pandemic or the Russia-Ukraine conflict have significantly affected persistence in the cryptocurrency market. cryptocurrency; persistence; long memory; fractional integration JEL Classification: C22, G12 Corresponding author: Professor Guglielmo Maria Caporale, Department of Economics and Finance, Brunel University London, Uxbridge, UB8 3PH, UK. Email: Guglielmo-

The cryptocurrency market has developed significantly since the launch of Bitcoin in January 2009, thereby providing new investment opportunities to agents. One important issue is the extent to which it can be characterised as an efficient market, which requires prices to follow a random walk and thus to be unpredictable. Whilst numerous studies have analysed persistence of other asset prices (see, e.g., Mills, 1993; Barkoulas & Baum, 1996; Jacobsen, 1996; Caporale and Gil- Alana, 2004; Caporale et al., 2016), the evidence concerning the cryptocurrency market is more limited. The most extensive study on this topic is due to Caporale et al. (2018), who found time- varying persistence in Bitcoin, Litecoin, Wave, and Run over the period 2013-2017, whilst Caporale and Plastun (2019) detected an anomaly in the case of Bitcoin, which appears to have higher returns on Mondays than on the other days of the week. The aim of the present paper is to investigate the possible impact on the cryptocurrency market of two most recent exogenous shocks that have affected the world economy, namely the Covid-19 pandemic and the Russia-Ukraine war. Although a few existing studies have already examined this issue (see, e.g., Sabrine et al., 2022; Khalfaoui et al., 2023; Lahmiri, 2023; Theiri et al., 2023), ours considers a wider set of cryptocurrencies and uses a more general and flexible modelling approach. More specifically, our analysis is carried out for the five cryptocurrencies with the highest degree of market capitalisation (Bitcoin, Ethereum, Tether, BNB and USD Coin) using fractional integration methods that are informative about the long-memory, mean reversion and persistence properties of the series of interest. Estimates of the fractional differencing parameter measuring the degree of persistence are obtained first for the period ending in December 2019; then the sample is extended to December 2021 to examine the possible impact of the Covid-

19 pandemic, and finally to April 2023 to shed light on the possible effects of the Russia-Ukraine The layout of the paper is the following: Section 2 briefly reviews the relevant literature; Section 3 presents the empirical analysis; Section 4 offers some concluding remarks. Despite the relatively recent launch of cryptocurrencies, their considerable success has led to various studies being carried out on the properties of this new market. For instance, Giudici et al. (2020) highlighted some of the benefits of cryptocurrencies but also stressed the need for more stringent regulations. Papadimitriou et al. (2020) found that the cryptocurrencies with the highest market capitalisation are not necessarily those offering the most profitable investment opportunities. Gil-Alana et al. (2020) could not detect long-run linkages between the main cryptocurrencies. Colon et al. (2021) concluded that cryptocurrencies are used as a strong hedge in the presence of geopolitical risk and as a weak one in the presence of economic uncertainty. Liu and Serletis (2019) provided evidence of high volatility in the cryptocurrency market resulting Some other studies have focused on the long-memory properties of cryptocurrencies. For instance, Jena et al. (2020) analysed time-varying long memory in six cryptocurrencies using the Hurst exponent method and found that DASH, NEW and Bitcoin are the most inefficient cryptocurrency markets. Jiang et al. (2018) also used the Hurst exponent approach and found evidence of long memory and inefficiency in the Bitcoin market. Al-Yahyaee et al. (2020) applied the MF-DFA method in addition to the Hurst exponent one and found long memory in six cryptocurrencies. Aslan and Sensoy (2020) again used the Hurst exponent for the most capitalised

cryptocurrencies and found considerable heterogeneity across these markets. Finally, Arouxet et al. (2022) reported that the Covid-19 pandemic had only a slight impact on the long-memory properties of both the returns and volatility of seven cryptocurrencies. The present study uses daily data on the five cryptocurrencies with the highest market capitalization, namely Bitcoin, Ethereum, Tether, BNB and USD Coin. The sample period ends in all cases on 25 April 2023, while the start date varies depending on data availability (see Table 1 for details). The longest available series is for Bitcoin (from 28 April 2013), which is also the leader in the cryptocurrency market in terms of market capitalisation (more than double that of Ethereum). Plots of the five series are displayed in Figure 1. TABLE 1 AND FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE The estimated model is the following: 𝑦𝑡 = 𝛼+ 𝛽𝑡+ 𝑥𝑡, (1 −𝐵)𝑑𝑥𝑡= 𝑢𝑡, 𝑡= 1, 2, . . ., where yt is the observed time series, α and β are the intercept and the time trend coefficient respectively, d stands for the differencing parameter measuring persistence, and ut is a I(0) or short- memory process which is assumed to be weakly autocorrelated; however, instead of imposing a specific ARMA model, we use the exponential spectral model of Bloomfield (1973), which is a non-parametric approach approximating AR structures. This type of model has also been used to analyse the properties of various other asset prices (see, e.g., Gil-Alana and Moreno, 2012; Nystrup et al., 2017; Abbritti et al., 2016; 2023; etc.). Table 2 reports the estimates of d and the 95% confidence bands for the sample ending in December 2019, i.e., prior to the Covid-19 pandemic, whilst the results in Table 3 are for the

sample ending in December 2021 which incorporates the pandemic, and those in Table 4 for the one ending on 25 April 2023 which also includes the Russia-Ukraine war. In each case three difference specifications are estimated: (i) without deterministic terms, (ii) with a constant only, (iii) with a constant and a linear time trend. The estimates in bold are those from the models selected on the basis of the statistical significance of the regressors. INSERT TABLES 2, 3 AND 4 ABOUT HERE In the case of the sample ending in December 2019 (Table 2) the time trend is significant for Tether, while the intercept is significant for the other cryptocurrencies. The estimated values of d are close to 1 in three out of the five cases, the exception being USD Coin (d = 0.52) and Tether (-0.11), the latter being characterised by anti-persistence (d < 0). The unit root null hypothesis cannot be rejected for Bitcoin (d = 1.01) and Ethereum (1.02), while it is rejected in favour of d > 1 for BNB (d = 1.14). When the sample is extended to December 2021 to include the Covid-19 pandemic (Table 3), the time trend coefficients is found to be significant for three cryptocurrencies (Bitcoin, Ethereum and Tether), while the intercept is significant for the other two (BNB and USD Coin). The estimates of d are now higher, and in the case of BNB the unit root null is rejected in favour of d > 1, whereas for USD it cannot be rejected (d = 1), and in the case of Tether again anti- persistence (d < 0) is found. Finally, in the case of the sample ending in April 2023, which also includes the Russia- Ukraine war (Table 4), the time trend coefficient is statistically significant for Tether, for which anti-persistence is again found (d<0), whilst the unit root null (d=1) cannot be rejected in the case of Bitcoin (1.03), Ethereum (1.03) and USD Coin (0.55), but it is rejected in favour of d > 1 in the case of BNB (1.15).

INSERT TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE Table 5 provides a summary of the results. We indicate with “ + “ and “ – “ respectively an increase and decrease in the degree of persistence with respect to the previous subsample. Apart from Tether, which is characterised by anti-persistence, the only series exhibiting mean-reverting behaviour is USD Coin, for which the full-sample estimate of d is lower than 1 (0.55), whilst shocks are found to have permanent effects in the cases of Bitcoin, BNB and Ethereum, for which the estimates of d are significantly higher than 1. On the whole, the evidence also suggests very limited effects of both the Covid-19 and the Russia-Ukraine war on the degree of persistence of the cryptocurrency market. The most significant impact is detected in the case of USD Coin, the estimated value of d increasing from 0.52 to 0.56 when including the Covid-19 pandemic period and then decreasing slightly to 0.56 when also incorporating the Russia-Ukraine conflict. A slight increase in d is found in the case of BNB and Ethereum in the two extended samples compared to the shortest one (from 1.14 to 1.15, and from 1.02 to 1.03), whilst there is a slight decrease in the case of Bitcoin in the full sample compared to the two earlier ones (from 1.04 to 1.03), and in the degree of anti-persistence of Tether (from -0.09 to -0.08) in the two extended samples. However, in all cases the differences between these point estimates are not statistically significant. The closest study to the current one is Caporale et al. (2018), which investigates the persistence of four main cryptocurrencies (Bitcoin, Litecoin, Ripple, Dash) over the sample period 2013–2017. Interestingly, their recursive analysis also implies that in the case of Bitcoin the parameter d is greater than 1, which is consistent with our findings.

This paper has applied fractional integration techniques to analyse persistence in the five cryptocurrencies with the highest market capitalisation, namely Bitcoin, Ethereum, Tether, BNB and USD Coin, and also considered the possible impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and of the Russia-Ukraine war. Our results point to mean reversion in the case of the USD Coin (0.5 ≤ d < 1), an explosive pattern (d > 1) in the case of BNB, and anti-persistence (d < 0) in the case of Tether. The I(1) null hypothesis cannot be rejected in the case of Bitcoin (1.03), Ethereum (1.03) and USD Coin (0.55), whilst it is rejected in favour of d > 1 in the case of BNB (1.15). A comparison of the estimates obtained for different sample periods indicates a very limited impact (if any) of both the Covid-19 pandemic and the Russia-Ukraine conflict on persistence in the One limitation of the present study is that it does not take into account possible nonlinearities. Future work will address this issue by, for instance, using Chebyshev polynomials in time as in Cuestas and Gil-Alana (2016). Further, it will also examine the possible effects on the cryptocurrency market of other shocks such as the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2007-8.

Abbritti M., Gil-Alana L.A., Lovcha Y. & Moreno A. (2016). Term structure persistence. Journal of Financial Econometrics, 14(2), 331–352. https://doi.org/10.1093/jjfinec/nbv003 Abbritti, M., Carcel, H., Gil-Alana, L.A. & Moreno, A. (2023). Term premium in a fractionally cointegrated yield curve. Journal of Banking and Finance, Volume 149, 106777. Al-Yahyaee, K.H., Mensi, W., Ko, H., Yoon, S. & Kang, S. (2020). Why cryptocurrency markets are inefficient: The impact of liquidity and volatility. The North American Journal of Economics and Finance 52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.najef.2020.101168 Arouxet, M.B., Bariviera, A.F., Pastor, V.E. & Vampa, V. (2022). Covid-19 impact on cryptocurrencies: Evidence from a wavelet-based Hurst exponent. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 596. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2022.127170 Aslan, A. & Sensoy, A. (2020). Intraday efficiency-frequency nexus in the cryptocurrency markets. Finance Research Letters 35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2019.09.013 Barkoulas, J.T. & Baum, C.F. (1996). Long-term dependence in stock returns. Economics Letters, 53(3), 253-259. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-1765(96)00935-4 Bloomfield, P. (1973). An exponential model in the spectrum of a scalar time series, Biometrika Caporale, G.M. & Gil-Alana, L.A. (2004). Long range dependence in daily stock returns. Applied Financial Economics, 14(6), 375-383. Caporale, G.M., Gil-Alana, L.A., Plastun, A. & Makarenko, I. (2016). Long memory in the Ukrainian stock market and financial crises. Journal of Economics and Finance, 40 (2), 235–257. Caporale, G.M., Gil-Alana, L.A. & Plastun, A. (2018). Persistence in the cryptocurrency market. Research in International Business and Finance 46, 141-148. Caporale, G.M. & Plastun, A. (2019). The day of the week effect in the cryptocurrency market. Finance Research Letters 31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2018.11.012 Colon, F., Kim, C., Kim, H., & Kim, W. (2021). The effect of political and economic uncertainty on the cryptocurrency market. Finance Research Letters 39.

Cuestas, J. C. and Gil-Alana, L. A. (2016). A nonlinear approach with long range dependence based on Chebyshev polynomials. Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics and Econometrics, 23, 445- Giudici, G., Milne, A. & Vinogradov, D. (2020). Cryptocurrencies: market analysis and perspectives. Journal of Industrial and Business Economics 47, 1–18. Gil-Alana, L.A., Abakah, E.J. & Rojo, M.F. (2020). Cryptocurrencies and stock market indices. Are they related? Research in International Business and Finance 51. Gil-Alana L.A. & Moreno A. (2012). Uncovering the US term premium: an alternative route. Journal of Banking and Finance, 36(4), 1181–1193. Jacobsen, B. (1996). Long term dependence in stock returns. Journal of Empirical Finance, 3(4), Jena, S.K., Tiwari, A.K. & Doğan, B. & Hammoudeh, Sh. (2020). Are the top six cryptocurrencies efficient? Evidence from time-varying long memory. International Journal of Finance & Economics, 27(3), 3730-3740. https://doi.org/10.1002/ijfe.2347 Jiang, Y., Nie, H. & Ruan, W. (2018). Time-varying long-term memory in Bitcoin market. Finance Research Letters 25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2017.12.009 Khalfaoui, R., Gozgor, G. & Goodell, J. W. (2023). Impact of Russia-Ukraine war attention on cryptocurrency: Evidence from quantile dependence analysis. Finance Research Letters, Volume Lahmiri, S. (2023). The effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on multifractals of price returns and trading volume variations of cryptocurrencies. Decision Analytics Journal, Volume 6, 100173, Liu, J. & Serletis, A. (2019). Volatility in the Cryptocurrency Market. Open Economies Review 30, 779–811. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11079-019-09547-5 Mills, T. C. (1993). Is there long-term memory in UK stock returns? Applied Financial Economics, 3(4), 303-306. https://doi.org/10.1080/758534941 Nystrup P, Madsen H, Lindström E. (2017). Long memory in financial time series and hidden Markov models with time varying parameters. Jjournal of Forecasting, 36(8):989–1002. doi:

Papadimitriou, T., Gogas, P. & Gkatzoglou, F. (2020). The evolution of the cryptocurrencies market: A complex networks approach. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 376. Sabrine, A., Arouri, M. & Adel, B. (2022). War and Cryptocurrency markets: An Empirical Investigation. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4116377 or Theiri, S., Nekhili, R. & Sultan, J. (2023). Cryptocurrency liquidity during the Russia–Ukraine war: the case of Bitcoin and Ethereum. Journal of Risk Finance, 24(1), 59-71.

Table 1: Capitalisation in the cryptocurrency market (25.04.2023) 5 USD Coin $30,684,782,288 Source: https://coinmarketcap.com/coins/, Cryptocurrency Market Capitalization Data.

Table 2: Estimates of d for the sample ending in December 2019 An intercept and a time trend Estimated coefficients in the selected models: Intercept and time trend Note: values in parenthesis in the upper panel are the 95% confidence intervals for the estimates of the differencing parameter. In bold, the estimates from the selected models. In the lower panel, in parenthesis in column 3 and 4, the

Table 3: Estimates of d with data ending at December 2021 An intercept and a time trend Estimated coefficients in the selected models: Intercept and time trend Note: values in parenthesis in the upper panel are the 95% confidence intervals for the estimates of the differencing parameter. In bold, the estimates from the selected models. In the lower panel, in parenthesis in column 3 and 4, the

Table 4: Estimates of d with data ending at December 2023 An intercept and a time trend Estimated coefficients in the selected models: Intercept and time trend Note: values in parenthesis in the upper panel are the 95% confidence intervals for the estimates of the differencing parameter. In bold, the estimates from the selected models. In the lower panel, in parenthesis in column 3 and 4, the

Table 5: Summary of the Results Note: - and + indicate respectively a decrease and an increased in the order of integration with respect to the previous

Figure 1: Time series plots

---NEW PAPER---

The Rise and Fall of Cryptocurrencies Berglas School of Economics Tel Aviv University, Israel Berglas School of Economics Tel Aviv University, Israel Tandy School of Computer Science The University of Tulsa, USA Tandy School of Computer Science The University of Tulsa, USA Department of Computer Science University of New Mexico, USA Since Bitcoin’s introduction in 2009, interest in cryptocurrencies has soared. One manifestation of this interest has been the explosion of newly created coins. paper examines the dynamics of coin creation, competition and destruction in the cryptocurrency industry. In order to conduct the analysis, we develop a methodology to identify peaks in prices and trade volume, as well as when coins are abandoned and subsequently “resurrected”. We study trading activity associated with 1 082 coins over a nearly five-year period. We present evidence that the more frequently traded coins experience the biggest price rises. They are also much less likely to be abandoned, that is, to experience a drop in average trading volume to below 1% of a prior peak value. Overall, we find that 44% of publicly-traded coins are abandoned, at least temporarily. 71% of abandoned coins are later resurrected, leaving 18% of coins to fail permanently. We then examine the association between entry and exit and other key variables such as price, volume, and market capitalization in order to analyze and provide intuition underpinning the fundamentals in this market. We conclude by examining the bursting of the Bitcoin bubble in December 2017. Unlike the end of the 2013 bubble, some alternative cryptocurrencies continue to flourish after the fall of Bitcoin. ∗Authors listed in alphabetical order.

Over the past three years, the market capitalization for cryptocurrencies has exploded: soar- ing from $12 Billion in February 2014 all the way up to $414 Billion in February 2018. Furthermore, the number of coins has increased ten fold in the same period. In this paper, we analyze the dynamics of this burgeoning industry. Here, we restrict our attention to coins, that is, entities with their own distributed ledger. We do not consider tokens, which are entities built on top of coins. We develop a methodology in order to define volume peaks, price peaks, coin abandon- ment, and coin “resurrections.” We then examine the association between entry and exit and other key variables such as price, volume, and market capitalization in order to analyze and provide intuition underpinning the fundamentals in this market. Importantly, we also examine the after-effects of two periods in which bitcoin prices rose steeply and then fell Our main results are as follows: • We find that 44% of publicly traded coins are subsequently abandoned, 18% perma- nently. Furthermore, 85% of announced coins fail before being traded publicly. • Most coins are not traded much, and these coins are more likely to be abandoned than • Several of the indicators we examine suggest that many of the entrants and resurrected coins are riding “the wave” created by the huge increase in the cryptocurrency market. • We analyze two Bitcoin price bubbles and identify the effects on the other coins. Following the bursting of the 2014 bubble, other major cryptocurrencies fell by more than Bitcoin did. Following the recent bubble, many of the popular cryptocurrencies including leaders like Ethereum and Ripple (as well as others) fell only slightly. This may represent a potentially game-changing period, in which other cryptocurrencies It is important to examine the dynamics in the cryptocurrency industry, in addition to the meteoric growth. One reason why is that the potential for fraud in such an unregulated marketplace is significant, from actors deliberately manipulating prices to their own benefit to hucksters creating new coins promising benefits that deceive investors. This is not merely a theoretical risk. Gandal et al. have shown that the massive rise in the bitcoin price in 2013 from approximately $150 to more than $1 000 in one three month period was likely due to price manipulation in the market [14]. At the beginning of 2014, the “bubble” burst and the price of bitcoin fell dramatically. The price of bitcoin has exploded again in 2017, jumping from approximately $1 000 in early 2017 to more than $19 000 in December 2017 and back down to $7 000 at the time of writing (early February 2018). The percent increase in 2017 (approximately 1 900 percent) is even greater than the percent increase that bitcoin experienced during 2013 (approximately 500 percent). Concern abounds that price manipulation exists in this industry today [22]—. Another reason to study the market dynamics is because Bitcoin’s dominance of the industry is being challenged by other coins. Currently Bitcoin has 35 percent of the market,

while Ethereum has 20 percent and Ripple has another 10 percent. Ethereum has been able to challenge Bitcoin based on its extensibility – 19 of the top 20 tokens are built on top of Ethereum. Ripple, created by the same creator as the now-defunct Bitcoin exchange, Mt. Gox, has been able to attract over 100 banks as well as Western Union to its platform [21]. This is a stark comparison to the earlier days of Bitcoin: from its inception through 2016, Bitcoin had more than 90 percent of the market. History of the Cryptocurrency Market Bitcoin (BTC), the first cryptocurrency, was founded in 2009. While the market took off slowly, a massive spike in the price of bitcoin in late 2013 led to wider interest in what had been until then a niche industry. The value of Bitcoin increased from around $150 in mid 2013 to over $1 000 in late 2013. The fall was dramatic as well and by 2016, one bitcoin was worth approximately $200. Despite the bursting of the bubble, cryptocurrencies were on the map and massive entry (as well as non-trivial exit) has occurred in the industry during the last four years. While Bitcoin dominated the market through most of the 2009-2016 period, in 2013, a few other cryptocurrencies competed with Bitcoin. These coins began appreciating much more quickly than Bitcoin during the price rise. Gandal and Halaburda analyzed how network effects affected competition in the cryp- tocurrency market during the price spike and subsequent fall in the price of bitcoin [13] in . Their analysis suggests that there were strong network effects and winner-take-all dynamics following the fall in the price of bitcoin in early 2014. From July 2014 to February 2016, bitcoin’s value was essentially constant against the USD, while the other currencies depreci- ated dramatically against the USD. Litecoin, the number two coin in the market, declined by 70% in value, while other “main” coins declined by more than 90% in value. In early 2016, Bitcoin accounted for 94% of the total market capitalization, while Litecoin (the number two cryptocurrency) accounted for 2%. Despite its shortcomings, Bitcoin had emerged at that point as the clear winner and beneficiary of network effects. In 2017, things changed dramatically. Bitcoin began rising again and by early 2017, the value of bitcoin was again more than $1 000. It had taken more than three years for the value of bitcoin to return to the 2013 peak level, but that was only the beginning. The market capitalization of cryptocurrency grew stunningly in the past few years. In February 2014, the market capitalization of all cryptocurrencies was approximately $14 Bil- lion. As of February 2018, the total market capitalization was approximately $414 Billion. That is more than a ten-fold increase. Currently, there are more than 300 cryptocurrencies with market capitalization between $1 Million and $100 Million. In January 2014, there were less than 30 coins with market capitalization between $1 million and $100 million. This has raised concerns of price manipulation. Our paper straddles two literatures. The first is an economics literature on emerging industries. A common theme in the theoretical literature on the topic is that both “learning by doing” (supply side) and “learning by using” (demand side) play a key role

in the evolution of new industries.1 There is also a theoretical literature on the dynamics in industries with network effects. See Gandal for a selective review [12]. In addition to the theoretical literature, there is also a large empirical literature in Eco- nomics on the dynamics of entry and exit.2 One particular focus in this literature is on the post-entry performance of firms. These studies typically examine the entry and exit rates over time, the number of firms in the industry over time, the survival rate of new firms, and the evolution of firm size over time.3 One particularly robust finding in this literature is that entry into new markets generally occurs in waves. This seems to be the case in the cryptocurrency industry as well, as we show in our analysis. The empirical literature in economics has also examined and measured the strength of network effects. A key question is whether first-mover advantages and large networks can be overcome by improvements in quality by late entrants. Our analysis suggests that quality advantages of later entrants may eventually overcome Bitcoin’s first-mover advantages in the cryptocurrency market. Our paper also adds to a nascent literature on cryptocurrencies and the financial sector.4 Within the finance literature, there is growing interest in discovering what drives a “value- less” currency. Li and Wang investigate the bitcoin exchange rate in an effort to expand our understanding of the motivation behind the rise and fall of cryptocurrency values [19]. Corbet et al. expanded upon that, finding that shocks to traditional financial assets did not affect cryptocurrencies [10]. However the shocks to the price of the three cryptocurrencies they studied (Bitcoin, Ripple, and Litecoin) did affect each other. Xie et al. analyze the effects of social activity on the Bitcoin forum on the price of Bitcoin [26]. They find that during periods of time when users are highly connected, the price of Bitcoin is highly likely Bolt and van Oordt build a theoretical model to examine the exchange rate of virtual currencies [9]. Additionally, Hayes constructs a model for determining the value of a “bitcoin-like” cryptocurrency by calculating its cost of production. There are others that have researched the altcoin and initial coin offering (ICO) ecosys- tem. Huang et al. looked at the profitability of mining alternative cryptocurrencies [17]. They compare potential profits earned by mining a currency or speculating on the same currency and claim that miners can earn more and that mining is less risky. Adhami et al. looked at token sales [1]. They took a survey of ICOs and found that most of the token sales were successful and that the secondary market was quite liquid. Amsden and Schweizer studied features that caused tokens to trade on currency exchanges [3], finding that features like quality token operators increased the likelihood of trading. Krafft et al. did an experi- mental study of 271 “penny cryptocurrencies” (similar to penny stocks) using the currency exchange, Cryptsy [18]. They found that when their bots bought a “penny cryptocurrency,” the result was a two percentage point increase in buying activity from others. Bian et al. designed a system to identify scam ICOs by analyzing their whitepapers, websites, and other aspects of tokens [6]. Bacina and Kassra analyzed token sales through the lens of Australian law [5]. They divided tokens into three categories: “protocol tokens,” “asset-backed tokens,” 1 Rob developed a theoretical model that shows that under uncertainty regarding the size of the market, entry will occur in waves [23]. Vettas obtained similar results in an extension of the Rob model to a setting with uncertainty on both sides of the market [25]. 2For a good summary of early work, see the Audretsch and Mataon the post-entry performance of firms [4]. 3See Geroski and the references cited within for a survey of the literature [15]. 4For an in-depth overview of how the Bitcoin ecosystem works, see B¨ohme et al. [7].

and “access tokens.” In our analysis, we only consider coins, that is, entities with their own distributed ledger. In the terminology of Bacina and Kassra, we are examining protocol tokens. These value of these entities are based on their trading value, and are not tied to any asset or any network. This focus makes sense, since we are interested in competition between coins in the cryptocurrency industry. Finally, this work is relevant to literature in cybersecurity and finance investigating fraud. Currently, cryptocurrency markets are largely unregulated. As such, they are highly sus- ceptible to price manipulation: by small scale traders, such as Krafft et al. trading penny cryptocurrencies [18], by wayward insiders, such as the bots run by the operators of the Mt. Gox exchange [14], or by hucksters running Ponzi schemes [24]. Financially motivated actors have been shown to manipulate over-the-counter stock markets [2] and use email spam to tout pump-and-dump stock schemes [8, 11, 16]. Also, we analyze currency abandonment, analogous to the Bitcoin exchange closures that have wreaked havoc on the ecosystem [20]. Note that in this work, we do not try to investigate the motives behind the market dynamics and identify fraudulent activity. Rather, we expect that our contribution of characterizing peaks, abandonments, and the overall dynamics of the market might spur further investiga- tions in this vein. We first describe the data sources used to investigate cryptocurrencies. Next, we describe how we identify peaks in trading volume and price, as well as when coins are abandoned and To examine the dynamics in the cryptocurrency industry, we gather pub- licly available data on coins from coinmarketcap.com. The website lists all cryptocurrencies that reports pricing and 24-hour trading volume via a public API.5 Such transparent and easy-to-achieve criteria has enabled the website to become the most comprehensive public repository of cryptocurrency trading information. The available data for each cryptocurrency includes daily summary values for the open, high, low, and close prices, trading volume, ex- changes, and market capitalization. All monetary values reported by coninmarketcap.com are given in USD. We collected data on 1 082 currencies on 2018-02-07, which yielded 662 837 daily observations, starting from February 2013 up to February 2018. This is, of course, an Because currencies appearing on coinmarketcap.com are already being traded, this data excludes coins that have been announced but not yet traded. We also want to identify when coins fail prior to public launch, so we gather supplemental data from the altcoin announce- ments forum on bitcointalk.org. We crawl the forum and consider all announcements which had the term “coin” in them and did not reference a token platform such as Bitcoin, Waves, or Ethereum. We also throw out posts referring to coins that appear on the to- ken section of coinmarketcap. We semi-automatically parse out the name of the coin and consider the timestamp of the first post for a given coin as the announcement date. 5This is true as long as at least one such API reports positive trade volume.

Identifying Peaks, Abandonments, and Resurrections In order to say something about exits, we need to identify peaks in volume. This is because trade in marginal cryp- tocurrencies can be dormant for many months only to increase again when investment surges in the industry. We are also interested in identifying price peaks since they indicate the po- tential profits or losses that may result from trading. We begin by identifying “candidate” price and volume peaks for each cryptocurrency. We define a candidate peak as a day in which the 7-day rolling average value is greater than any value 30 days before or after. In order to identify only those peaks with sudden jumps in value, we define a candidate as a peak that satisfies two additional criteria: • The candidate peak value must be greater than or equal 50% of the minimum value in the 30 days prior to the candidate peak. • The candidate peak value must be at least 5% as large as the currency’s maximum We then use our resulting peak data to define cryptocurrency abandonment. We compare each of the peak values to all of the succeeding daily volume values for each cryptocurrency. We define abandonment as follows: • If the daily average volume for a given month is less than or equal to 1% of the peak volume, the currency is considered abandoned. Unlike other industries, where exit is a “one-way road,” currencies don’t necessarily stay “dead” when they are abandoned. If the average daily trading volume for a month following a peak is greater than ten percent of the peak value and that currency is currently abandoned, then its status changes to resurrected. Two examples of currency abandonment and then resurrection are shown in Figure 1. VeriCoin was established in mid-2014, reached an early peak volume of $1.5 million, but then was promptly abandoned within a few months. Nearly two years later, in mid-2016, volume jumped slightly, but to less than 10% of the prior peak value. Then, in the spring of 2017, the currency was resurrected, eventually reaching a trading volume more than 15 times greater than its first peak volume of $1.6 million. MaxCoin began trading in early 2014 and quickly reached a peak volume of $2.7 million before becoming abandoned less than four months later. The cryptocurrency was resurrected during the 2017 period of massive growth before once again becoming abandoned in October of 2017. During this period peak trading volume did not reach its initial peak value, however, it came close at $1.8 million at its highest point. The last abandonment of the currency appears to be a permanent abandonment as it has not yet been resurrected in 2018. In Section 4.1, we discuss summary measures of peaks, abandonment and resurrection. We then analyze market dynamics in Section 4.2, including how coin creation and abandonment is correlated with Bitcoin’s popularity. In Section 4.3, we compare the bursting of two bubbles in cryptocurrency prices – and show that first-mover advantages appear to have

Figure 1: Volume plot showing currency abandonment. Red dots indicate peaks. Peaks, Abandonment and Resurrection Nearly all currencies had at least one price and volume peak. 1 068 (out of 1 082 total) currencies had price peaks, yielding a total of 3 508 peaks across all currencies. Fur- thermore, 1 076 (out of 1 082 total) currencies experienced volume peaks, yielding a total 3 828 total peaks across all currencies. In a constantly-expanding environment with more than 1 000 coins, it is no surprise that only a small number attract large numbers of transactions, while many never catch on. In order to study characteristics of the entire ecosystem while recognizing vast differences in popularity, we binned the coins into different size groups based on total transaction volume. Table 1 reports summary statistics on many key measures reported throughout this sec- tion, listing both overall measures and figures split by these size groups. In the first row, we can see that just 57 coins report total transaction volume exceeding $1 billion. Most coins are much less popular: 374 have traded less than $1 million total, while another 344 have traded between $1–$10 million. In other words, two thirds of coins report less than $10 million in total trading volume.

% Price Increase Start to 1st Peak median % price increase to 1st peak total vol. < $100M total vol. > $100M % Volume Increase Start to 1st Peak median % volume increase to 1st peak Figure 2: Percentage price and volume increase from a coin’s launch to first peak, based on the year in which the coin is launched and its size. (Note: the vertical axis is logarithmic.) Unsurprisingly, these smaller coins account for the majority of observed price and volume peaks, as indicated in the table. However, the number of volume and price peaks per coin is quite consistent regardless of coin size. The median number of price and volume peaks is each 3, and this number varies only between 2 and 4 for each size category. What more can we say about these peaks? The first peak after launching is important because it represents what early backers of coins stand to gain by getting behind the coins before the general public can participate. The median time to the first peak in trade volume is just 40 days, and the median increase in trade volume from the first trading day to the first peak is 3 714%. For price peaks, the median jump in price from a coin’s launch to the first peak is 749%. This means that half of coin backers see at least a seven-fold rise in price by the time the first peak is reached. Breaking down the initial price and volume peaks by coin size is quite telling. Smaller coins experience a much smaller price and volume rise than larger coins. For coins under $1 million total trade volume, the median price jump is “only” 418%. For the 57 coins with eventual trading volume of more than $1 bilion, the median price rise for the first peak is 3 441%! The median jumps in volume are even more extreme, with a 90 530% rise for the biggest coins compared to 917% for the smallest coins. We of course recognize that the biggest coins are more likely to also be the ones with the bigger jumps, these figures do quantify just how extreme these differences are. It also points to the possibility that investors may be attracted to coins experiencing bigger initial increases. Figure 2 examines the relationship between when a coin is launched and the magnitude of the initial peak after launch. The left graph plots the median percent price rise based on the coin’s launch year. Overall, coins launched in 2015 enjoyed a median initial price jump of over 1 700%. This fell steadily, to 1 075% in 2015 and 370% for coins launched in 2017. Coins with higher transaction volume fared even better, with the median initial price rise peaking at over 9 000% in 2016. The initial volume jumps shown in Figure 2 (right) show a slightly different story. Median percentage jumps for the first volume peak were consistently higher than for prices, but stayed relatively level for coins launched in 2014–16. The median initial volume rise fell sharply in 2017, however. Taken together, these figures indicate that jumps in trading volume are very

# price peaks (total) # price peaks (median) # volume peaks (total) # volume peaks (median) Table 1: Summary statistics on coin peaks, abandonment and resurrection, broken down by total trading volume per coin. high, while initial price peaks have moderated somewhat. We now more closely examine the distribution of the size of both the rise and fall sur- rounding all peaks. Recall from our definition that a peak must be at least 50% of the minimum value of the 30 days prior to the peak. We now consider just how big those rises tend to be, as well as the magnitude of the resulting fall after the peak. Figure 3 (top left) plots the 10th to 90th percentiles of the peak’s percent price increase relative to the smallest price in the month prior.6 The percentiles are further divided by coin size. For example, we can see that the median price rise during peaks ranges from 200 to 300%. While this is lower than those reported for the initial price rise in Table 1, this can be attributed to the fact that here we are computing the rise over just 30 days prior to the peak. The top 10% of price rises range from 1 100% for coins traded between $100M-$1B to nearly 3 000% for coins with $1-10M in trading volume. In fact, this trend is consistent 6For this analysis we exclude any price or volume rises from peaks occurring in the first week of a coin’s operation, as well as any falls within the last week of its operation. This is to deal with edge effects from the 7-day rolling average used to compute peaks.

% price increase from min 30 days prior to peak % price decrease from peak to min 30 days after % volume increase from min 30 days prior to peak % volume decrease from peak to min 30 days after Figure 3: Deciles of percent price and volume rises from the smallest value in the month prior to a peak to the peak itself (left graphs); deciles of percent price and volume falls from the peak to the smallest value in the month following the peak (right graphs). throughout, with the second-smallest category rising fastest and the second-largest category Figure 3 (top right), meanwhile, examines what happens after the peak. Since by defini- tion the price must go down during the entire 30 days following the peak, we can quantify just how far prices fall. While there are differences across coin size (smaller coins fall farther), the most striking result is just how deep the falls are across the board. 9 out of 10 coins lose at least 40–50% of their value in the month following a peak. Half lose at least 60-75%. Even 10% of the biggest coins lose around 80% of their value within a month of reaching a The bottom two graphs in Figure 3 look at the distribution of the rises associated with peaks in trading volume. The bottom left graph clearly indicates that smaller currencies experience consistently bigger percentage increases in trading volume around peaks. This is unsurprising, given the lower starting base of trading volume in these smaller coins. Nonethe- less the percentage increases are quite staggering. Note that the graph uses a logarithmic scale. The median volume jump ranges from around 1 500% for the most frequently traded coins to more than 100 times that for the coins with the lowest trading volume. For the coins with less than $1 million in total trading volume, more than 30% of the time, there

Figure 4: Abandonments (left) and resurrections (right) per coin, split by total trading were days with zero trading within a month of hitting a new peak volume level. Finally, the decrease in volume after a peak is extreme. For all but the biggest coins, trading volume regularly falls more than 90% in the month following a peak. Despite huge price and volume rises, interest in many coins is not sustained. As shown in Table 1, we found that 475 cryptocurrencies, or 44% of all coins listed on coinmarketcap.com, were abandoned at least once according to our definition of average daily trading volume falling below 1% of the coin’s peak level in a given month. Of those 475 coins, 336 were “resurrected”, that is, a previously abandoned currency’s average daily trading volume rises to 10% of a prior peak value. There were a total of 642 cases of currencies being abandoned and 452 resurrections. That is, some currencies were abandoned or resurrected more than once. Figure 4 shows the number of abandonments (left) and resurrections (right) per coin based on trading volume. Most coins are abandoned just once, but a few are abandoned more often. Most multiple resurrections occur with smaller coins. A coin’s total trading volume is associated with its potential for abandonment. shown in Table 1, 65% of coins with less than $1 million trading volume are subsequently abandoned, compared to just 26% for those coins with trading volume between $100 million and $1 billion. Notably, no coins with total trading volume in excess of $1 billion have been abandoned. Similar trends follow for resurrection. Lower-volume coins are more likely to be resurrected than higher-volume ones. On average, abandoned coins disappear within 7.5 months of reaching their first peak (4 month median). So when coins fail, it can happen quickly. Resurrection takes a bit longer, with a 6 month median overall. In addition to being less likely to resurrect, higher volume coins take longer to do so. The median time to resurrection for coins with more than $100 million in trading volume is 19 months. For a closer look at the time to abandonment and resurrection, we compute survival prob- abilities using Kaplan Meier estimators, as shown in Figure 5. This enables us to empirically estimate the time from launch to abandonment using the duration of all coins, even those that have not been abandoned. Overall, the median time to abandonment for coins is 547

days since coin launched probability coin not yet abandoned months since coin abandoned probability coin not yet resurrected Figure 5: Survival probabilities for the time to abandonment (left) and time to resurrection days. The time to abandonment varies considerably with the coin’s total trading volume. For lightly-traded coins under $1 million, the median time from launch to abandonment is just 242 days. By contrast, for coins traded between $100 million and $1 billion, the median time to abandonment is 1 249 days, or around 3.5 years. Note, once again, that no coins with trading volume in excess of $1 billion have been abandoned. The right graph in Figure 5 shows the estimated time to resurrection. A few trends are apparent. First, the time to resurrection is shorter than the time to abandonment. Overall, the median time from abandonment to resurrection is 6 months. While there is variation between coin sizes, these differences are smaller in magnitude and not statistically significant. Ultimately, 190 coins (18% of all coins on coinmarketcap.com) remain abandoned at the end of our inspection period. This 18% permanent abandonment rate understates consid- erably the true rate of failure. This is because some cryptocurrencies fail to list themselves on an exchange after they first launch. This can happen for a variety of reasons, ranging from purposely operating as a short-lived scam to not having the resources to put the coin together as the founders intended. After crawling 12 794 posts on bitcointalk, we find 2 361 different cryptocurrencies an- nounced on the altcoin announcements section from January 2014 through September 2017. Of these currencies, only 346 later appeared on coinmarketcap.com. While 18% of listed currencies later become permanently abandoned, a whopping 85% of announced currencies on bitcointalk fail before ever becoming publicly traded. Figure 6 shows this trend over time. Many new currencies were introduced on the Bitcoin forums during 2014, however most never made it to be publicly traded. Note that in 2014, it was easy to create your own alternative currency using the now-defunct coingen.io. This service, which was less than $100, created clones of Bitcoin’s code with a few changed parameters. However, as many of these currencies failed to trade publicly, this fad died off.

New Coins Introduced (month) Figure 6: New currencies announced on the Bitcoin Forums each month (orange) compared to new currencies traded each month (black). Relationships between Key Variables During 2017 the combined market cap of all cryptocurrencies increased very significantly due to the meteoric rise in the prices of virtually all cryptocurrencies, as shown in Figure 7. During this meteoric rise, others have tried profiting off the increased interest in cryptocur- rencies by issuing their own coins. Some improved existing protocol’s deficiencies as they saw them (such as the Turing-complete Ethereum and the anonymous ZCash), while others simply tried to “ride the wave” of its success, providing an entrance to the ecosystem. This has led to an explosion of new currencies being minted. Furthermore, interest in altcoins (as measured by coin price and trading volume) also fluctuates with broader interest in Bitcoin. This trend picks up when there is a significant increase in the price of Bitcoin and other major cryptocurrencies. This is most visible during the price hike of bitcoin at the end of 2013, when it reached more than $1 000. When prices went back down, the pace of coins being added and invested in went down with it. The same is true for the bull market in 2017 which continues until Bitcoin’s peak of more than $19,000 in December 2017: prices, trading volume and the rate of new coins increased substantially. Figure 8 plots the number (top) and proportion (bottom) of active coins (i.e., those not abandoned) that experience a price or volume peak each month over time. Unsurprisingly, the graph shows significant correlation between the number of price and volume peaks. In any given month between 2014 and 2016, 10–20% of coins reported a peak in volume or price. In 2017, the trend accelerated significantly, with 60% of coins reaching a peak in June 2017, and over 90% of coins peaking in January 2018. The relationships between bitcoin price, coin creation, abandonment and resurrection are visible in Figure 9. Using the heuristics we develop on coin abandonment and resurrection, we examine market dynamics in this ecosystem. Intuitively, during a period of rapid price hikes, more competing currencies are being minted. Benefiting from traders’ exuberance, they enter circulation in noticeable volumes.

Figure 7: Average monthly market capitalization of all cryptocurrencies traded (in Billions However, when markets calm and prices fall, some currencies are abandoned. Taking this to the data, we would expect the share of altcoins being abandoned would lag the trend in prices. Well-established currencies such as Bitcoin might endure the volatility of cryptocurrency markets (and indeed we have found that no currencies with more than $1 billion in trading volume has been abandoned). However, a new currency which doesn’t yet have a substantial number of users holding it will likely suffer from the network effects that push activity towards bigger, more widely accepted, cryptocurrencies. This might lead to an increase in the number of coins entering the market as well as the number of coins being What do the data actually show? The top graph in Figure 9 illustrates the churn, with the number of newly introduced and abandoned coins per month. In early 2014, many coins were introduced, followed by a spike in abandonments later that year. The rate of both introduction and abandonment stayed relatively constant in 2015 and early 2016, before rising markedly in 2017. The next graph looks at resurrection and the daily transaction volume over time. Here, there is a fairly strong correlation: rates of resurrection are flat through 2015, slowly picking up in 2016 before accelerating rapidly in early and late 2017. As more people trade cryptocurrencies, it makes sense that more people would seek an opportunity to invest in previously abandoned coins. The next two graphs in Figure 9 show how the rate of introduction and abandonment impact the overall number of coin offerings over time. The solid black line in the third graph plots the number of coins currently active in a given month, while the dashed line plots the number of presently abandoned coins in a given month. The trend shows a steadily increasing number of active coins, and a lesser number of abandoned coins with a spike in late 2017. To see the impact of the spike, look at the next graph plotting the fraction of coins each month that are currently abandoned. In early 2015, nearly 40% of coins were marked as abandoned. That proportion has steadily declined in the time since, with considerable fluctuation. By January 2018, following 2017’s build-up of interest in cryptocurrencies, only around 20% of coins were still abandoned.

% coins price peak % coins volume peak Figure 8: Number (top) and percentage of active (bottom) coins experiencing price and volume peaks over time. The last graph plots the BTC-USD price on a logarithmic scale. activity in the graphs above frequently coincide with peaks in the BTC-USD price. Table 2: Monthly correlations between key variables in the ecosystem. To dig a bit deeper, in Table 2 we provide correlations between the key variables in the ecosystem using our monthly data. These correlations reveal two key trends in the market. • As expected, resurrection is highly correlated with the number of price and volume peaks (0.85 and 0.90 respectively). This suggests that many of the resurrected coins are riding “the wave” created by the huge increase in the cryptocurrency market. Additionally, trade volume (0.75) and the log-transformed BTC-USD price (0.71) are both positively correlated with resurrection (0.75)7. 7See Figure 9 for a graphic representation of the latter correlation.

Coins Resurrected/Avg. Daily Trans Vol Daily Avg. Trading Volume Per Month Active vs. Abandoned Coins Figure 9: Cryptocurrency summary statistics including abandonment, resurrection, creation, and daily average trading volume. • There is a high positive correlation (0.61) between the number of coins abandoned and the number of new coins created, suggesting that new coins are created to fill gaps left by coin abandonment. Thus, despite the general upward trend in prices, volume, there appears to be some competition between coins. This also suggests that there is substitutability among some of the coins. Thus, it is not the case that a “rising tide” is lifting all cryptocurrencies.

Figure 9 illustrates these effects visually. The top plot shows that coin abandonment and creation have similar trends over time. The second from the top plot shows the coin resurrection trend. We can see that coins start to be resurrected after there are sufficient dead coins. After that point, resurrection tracks the rest of the other trend lines. What seems to explain all of the currency trends is shown on the bottom plot – the bitcoin/USD trading price over time. Bitcoin is the market leader and still sets the trend for all of the other coins. This is supported by the relatively high correlation values among all variables and the log transformed BTC-USD price. Bursting of bubbles and the changing of the guard During the steep decline is Bitcoin prices in 2014, Gandal and Halaburda found that the trading prices of other cryptocurrencies fell when the price of Bitcoin fell [13]. Particularly, when Bitcoin fell from $1 151 on December 4, 2013 to $448 on April 30, 2014, Litecoin, the second most popular cryptocurrency at the time, fell from to $44.73 to $10.90. While the drop in Bitcoin was steep (-61%), Litecoin fell by 76%. From April 2014 through February 2016, the price of Bitcoin stayed virtually constant (it fell by 2%), while the prices of all the other top cryptocurrencies declined significantly in USD, with the declines ranging between In the recent rise and fall of Bitcoin, the currency reached a peak value of $19 498 on December 17, 2017. In the fifty-two days following the peak (to February 6, 2018), Bitcoin declined to $6 955, which is a decline of 64%. In the 52 days preceding the peak, Bitcoin rose from $5 905 to $19 498. Unlike the previous “rise and fall” at the end of 2013/beginning of 2014, other currencies behaved differently. Ethereum, for example, did not fall at all during the period in which Bitcoin fell by 64 percent. Similarly, Ripple fell by just 6%. Some currencies declined steeply, similar to the same magnitude as Bitcoin. As Table 3 shows, of the top 14 coins, eight (including Bitcoin) declined steeply after Bitcoin’s peak. Three coins declined slightly. In addition to Ripple, and Ethereum, Cardana declined by less than 20%. Two coins in the top-10, NEO and XLM, continued to rise even after the Bitcoin This is very different behavior compared to early 2014. In large part, this appears to be due to innovations by late entrant cryptocurrencies, which has led to a changing playing field. The changes show that Bitcoin’s network effect and first-mover advantage may not be able to compensate for the fact that Ripple and Ethereum’s platform have built complementary products onto the platform. Ethereum, for example, has applications outside of simply financial transactions, something that Bitcoin does not really have. Furthermore, Ethereum used its own token, Ether, to create a decentralized marketplace for computing power and other services. Ripple focuses on sending global payments quickly (a few seconds per transaction) and cheaply. These two platforms have cut deeply into Bitcoin’s market share. At the beginning of 2017, Bitcoin’s market share was above 80%. As of early February 2018, Bitcoin’s share of the total cryptocurrency market had fallen to just 34 percent. Ethereum’s market share is now 20 percent, while Ripples market cap is now 10 percent. And it is not just Ethereum and Ripple who are challenging Bitcoin: many other late entrant cryptocurrencies are creating

Percent change during each time period Percent change in 12/17 bubble Internet of People (IOP) Table 3: Currency movement during different influential time periods.

platforms for the exchange of digital goods. We may be indeed witnessing a changing of the We then examined in more detail the returns from the top 80 coins (in terms of trading volume) produced during the following three (52 day) periods, where returns are measured price changes in percentage terms.8 • Period I: From October 26, 2017 – Dec 17, 2017 (December 17 was Bitcoin’s peak) • Period II: From Dec 17, 2017 – Feb 6, 2018 • Period III: From Feb 6, 2018 – March 31, 2018 In period one (the euphoric period), we find that the median return was 174%. Never- theless, during this period, 25% of the top 80 coins lost 18% or more. On the flip side, 25% of the coins earned a median return greater than 376%. The variance of the returns was extremely large. The highest return during this period was 2 600 percent! Bitcoin itself rose from $5,748 to $19,475. In period two, when Bitcoin declined significantly (from its peak to $7 051), the median return was -32% and more than 75% of the coins had declines in value. Further, 25% of the coins lost more than 60% of their value. Nevertheless, 10% of the coins increased in value by 58% or more. The variance of the returns was an order of magnitude smaller than period one. The highest return during this period was 1 683%. In period three, when Bitcoin remained virtually unchanged, the median return was - 36%. More than 75% of the coins declined in value. 25% of the coins lost more than 60% of their value. More than 95% of the valuations fell. The variance was two orders of magnitude smaller than the variance in the second period. The highest return during this period was There is virtually no correlation between period I and period II returns, while the corre- lation between periods II and III is -0.41. This suggests that those coins that did not decline in the second period did so in the third period, and vice versa. Total volume and market capitalization of the coins (as of May 15, 2018) are uncorrelated with first and second period returns. Total volume and market capitalization are, however, positively correlated with third period returns. When we split these 80 coins into two groups (large trade volume vs. small trade volume and large market capitalization vs. small market capitalization), we find the following: the correlation between period III returns and volume/market cap is much higher for the more important coins, i.e., those with higher trading volume and market capitalization. analysis suggests that investors/speculators became somewhat more selective in the third In this paper, we provided a preliminary analysis of the dynamics in the cryptocurrency mar- ket. We have devised methods to identify peaks in trading volume and prices for over 1 000 8We chose 52 day periods in order to have three periods to analyze: the rise, the fall, and the aftermath.

coins. We find that lower-volume coins face greater risk of abandonment, but they are also more likely to rise again. We find that many of the entrants and resurrected coins are riding “the wave” created by the huge increase in the cryptocurrency market. Nevertheless, the high correlation between resurrection and exit suggests that there is increasing competition Another piece of evidence consistent with increasing competition is that unlike the burst- ing of Bitcoin’s first bubble in early 2014 (when nearly all altcoins followed Bitcoin down), in early 2018 there appears to be a divergence. Some coins’ fate are indeed tied to Bitcoin, but this time there are clear exceptions to that rule, suggesting a changing of the guard. While our results are preliminary, they have identified key themes that we will investigate We gratefully acknowledge support from the following research grants: US-Israel Binational Science Foundation grant No. 2016622, US National Science Foundation Award No. 1714291, and an Intel academic grant for basic research. [1] Saman Adhami, Giancarlo Giudici, and Stefano Martinazzi. Why do businesses go crypto? An empirical analysis of initial coin offerings. Available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract= [2] Rajesh K Aggarwal and Guojun Wu. Stock market manipulations. The Journal of Business, [3] Ryan Amsden and Denis Schweizer. Are blockchain crowdsales the new ‘gold rush’? success determinants of initial coin offerings. Available at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers. [4] David B Audretsch and Jos´e Mata. The post-entry performance of firms: Introduction. In- ternational Journal of Industrial Organization, 13(4):413–419, 1995. [5] Michael Bacina and Sina Kassra. Technology: Unlocking cryptocurrency token sales. LSJ: Law Society of NSW Journal, (37):79, 2017. [6] Shuqing Bian, Zhenpeng Deng, Fei Li, Will Monroe, Peng Shi, Zijun Sun, Wei Wu, Sikuang Wang, William Yang Wang, Arianna Yuan, et al. IcoRating: A deep-learning system for scam ICO identification. Available at: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1803.03670, 2018. [7] Rainer B¨ohme, Nicolas Christin, Benjamin Edelman, and Tyler Moore. Bitcoin: Economics, technology, and governance. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(2):213–38, 2015. [8] Rainer B¨ohme and Thorsten Holz. The effect of stock spam on financial markets. In Workshop on the Economics of Information Security, 2006. [9] Wilko Bolt and Maarten RC van Oordt. On the value of virtual currencies. Available at:

[10] Shaen Corbet, Andrew Meegan, Charles Larkin, Brian Lucey, and Larisa Yarovaya. Exploring the dynamic relationships between cryptocurrencies and other financial assets. Available at: [11] Laura Frieder and Jonathan Zittrain. Spam works: Evidence from stock touts and correspond- ing market activity. Hastings Comm. & Ent. LJ, 30:479, 2007. [12] Neil Gandal. Compatibility, standardization, and network effects: Some policy implications. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 18(1):80–91, 2002. [13] Neil Gandal and Hanna Halaburda. Can we predict the winner in a market with network effects? competition in cryptocurrency market. Games, 7(3):16, 2016. [14] Neil Gandal, JT Hamrick, Tyler Moore, and Tali Oberman. Price manipulation in the Bitcoin ecosystem. In forthcoming, Journal of Monetary Economics, 2018. [15] Paul A Geroski. What do we know about entry? International Journal of Industrial Organi- [16] Michael Hanke and Florian Hauser. On the effects of stock spam e-mails. Journal of Financial [17] Danny Yuxing Huang, Kirill Levchenko, and Alex C Snoeren. Short paper: Estimating prof- itability of alternative cryptocurrencies. 2018. [18] Peter M Krafft, Nicol´as Della Penna, and Alex Pentland. An experimental study of cryptocur- rency market dynamics. Available at: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1801.05831, 2018. [19] Xin Li and Chong Alex Wang. The technology and economic determinants of cryptocurrency exchange rates: The case of bitcoin. Decision Support Systems, 95:49–60, 2017. [20] Tyler Moore and Nicolas Christin. Beware the middleman: Empirical analysis of Bitcoin- exchange risk. In Financial Cryptography and Data Security, pages 25–33. Springer, 2013. Rise of Bitcoin competitor Ripple creates wealth to rival Zuckerberg. The New York Times, January 2018. [22] Nathaniel Popper. Worries grow that the price of bitcoin is being propped up. The New York Times, January 2018. Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/31/technology/ Learning and capacity expansion under demand uncertainty. Economic Studies, 58(4):655–675, 1991. [24] Marie Vasek and Tyler Moore. There’s no free lunch, even using Bitcoin: Tracking the pop- ularity and profits of virtual currency scams. In Financial Cryptography and Data Security, pages 44–61. Springer, January 2015. [25] Nikolaos Vettas. Demand and supply in new markets: diffusion with bilateral learning. The RAND Journal of Economics, pages 215–233, 1998. [26] Peng Xie, Hailiang Chen, and Yu Jeffrey Hu. Network structure and predictive power of social media for the bitcoin market. Available at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?

Appendix A: Sensitivity Analysis of Peak Detection % price jump for peak % of max peak Table 4: Sensitivity Analysis of Peak Definition Algorithm The algorithm used to discover peaks in the dataset utilizes several values that, when increased or decreased, affect the number of peaks returned. The three main variables whose values can be modified easily are: the window size on each side of the data point, the minimum value increase for peak, and threshold for minimum peak size. The values accepted for each are days (30 day default), percent (50% default), and percent (5% default) respectively. Table 4 displays the results from modifying the values. The cells shaded blue show the numbers obtained from the algorithm configuration used in the paper. Reducing the minimum required price jump has no effect on the median number of peaks found per currency, but it increases the total number of peaks discovered. Additionally, removing the restriction on the minimum peak value compared to the maximum peak found essentially doubles the number of peaks found for all currencies. This is concerning as most small peaks are within the domain of normal trading and do not lead us to believe they are result of anomalous trading activity. The number shown in the tables associated with Appendix A and B are higher than the numbers reported earlier in the paper. This is due to the fact that an updated dataset was used for the sensitivity analysis which spans 2013-04-28 to 2018-05-15 instead of the original 2013-04-28 to 2018- 02-07. However, these results are consistent with the numbers generated with the earlier dataset. Appendix B: Sensitivity Analysis of Abandonment and The abandonment and resurrection algorithm, like the peak algorithm, utilizes two threshold values to determine if a coin/token is abandoned and resurrected. The first variable, used to detect abandonment, uses a default value of 10%. If the price following a peak drops below 10% of the peak value the currency is considered to be abandoned. The second variable, used to detect

resurrection following a period of abandonment, uses a default value of 1%. If the price following abandonment increases to or above 1% of the abandonment value then the currency is said to be To examine how modifications would alter the results we tested a multitude of different values for both abandonment and resurrection. These values can be seen in Tables 5, 6, and 7. The values chosen for our analysis find a reasonable balance between too many and not enough Table 5: Total Number of Abandonments (Sensitivity Analysis) Table 6: Median Number of Abandonments (Sensitivity Analysis) Table 7: Total Duration of Abandonments (Sensitivity Analysis)

---NEW PAPER---

Methods to Analyze Time-to-Event Data: The Cox ,2 Daniela Leonardis,2 Maria Fusaro,3 Giovanni Tripepi,1 and Stefanos Roumeliotis 1Epidemiology Department, High Institute of Public Health-Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt 2Institute of Clinical Physiology (IFC-CNR), Clinical Epidemiology, And Physiopathology of Renal Diseases and Hypertension of Reggio Calabria, Italy 3National Research Council (CNR)–Institute of Clinical Physiology (IFC), Pisa, Italy and Department of Medicine, University of Padua, Italy 4Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, 1st Department of Internal Medicine, AHEPA Hospital, School of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece Correspondence should be addressed to Samar Abd ElHafeez; samarabdelhafeez.epid@gmail.com Received 29 April 2021; Revised 29 September 2021; Accepted 6 November 2021; Published 30 November 2021 Academic Editor: Alexandros Georgakilas Copyright © 2021 Samar Abd ElHafeez et al. This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is The Cox model is a regression technique for performing survival analyses in epidemiological and clinical research. This model estimates the hazard ratio (HR) of a given endpoint associated with a speciﬁc risk factor, which can be either a continuous variable like age and C-reactive protein level or a categorical variable like gender and diabetes mellitus. When the risk factor is a continuous variable, the Cox model provides the HR of the study endpoint associated with a predeﬁned unit of increase in the independent variable (e.g., for every 1-year increase in age, 2 mg/L increase in C-reactive protein). A fundamental assumption underlying the application of the Cox model is proportional hazards; in other words, the eﬀects of diﬀerent variables on survival are constant over time and additive over a particular scale. The Cox regression model, when applied to etiological studies, also allows an adjustment for potential confounders; in an exposure-outcome pathway, a confounder is a variable which is associated with the exposure, is not an eﬀect of the exposure, does not lie in the causal pathway between the exposure and the outcome, and represents a risk factor for the outcome. Survival analysis refers to a family of statistical techniques aimed at analyzing “time-to-event” data and/or assessing the relationship between a given exposure and the occur- rence of an outcome after a follow-up period among a cohort of individuals [1]. The Kaplan–Meier (KM) method explores the survival of a population under investigation and/or tests diﬀerences in the crude cumulative survival between exposure groups, with a graphical representation of the endpoint occurrence as a function of time [2]. None- theless, the KM method has important limitations. First, it does not provide an eﬀect estimate (i.e., a relative risk) or the related conﬁdence interval to compare the survival in diﬀerent patient groups [3]. Second, it does not permit the adjustment of confounders in etiological research or predic- tors in prognostic research [4]. Finally, the KM method requires data categorization, so calculation of the incremen- tal increase (or decrease) in the relative risk of a given event associated with one unit (or any number of units) increase in the candidate risk factor is not possible [5]. These limitations can be approached by Cox regression analysis, in which the dependent variable is the incidence rate of a speciﬁc event and the independent variables are risk factors or Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity Volume 2021, Article ID 1302811, 6 pages

predictors that the investigators use to explain or predict In 1972, Sir David Cox wrote an article describing an extension of KM analysis to incorporate patients’ baseline characteristics, such as age, clinical history, or exposure to certain factors, and time [6]. The Cox regression model is also known as proportional hazards regression analysis. It is a semiparametric method because there is no assumption about the distribution of survival times, but it assumes that the eﬀects of diﬀerent variables on survival are constant over time (proportionality assumption) and additive over a par- between a candidate risk factor and the incidence rate of an endpoint using the Cox regression model is to assess the proportionality assumption of the risk linked to the same risk factor; such an assumption considers that the hazard ratio (HR) associated with the risk factor must be constant over time. For example, if the risk factor is a binary variable (e.g., the presence of diabetes) and the survival curves of the two groups are crossed, it implies that the HR (diabetic vs. nondiabetic patients) is not constant over time [8]. The HR and its 95% conﬁdence interval are calculated from the Cox regression model. The HR is the ratio of the two hazard rates of a given event in treated versus untreated patients or exposed versus unexposed individuals, as well as the magnitude of the hazard rate change when a given con- tinuous variable (e.g., age or systolic blood pressure) increases by, for example, one or two units over a continu- ous scale [9]. The purpose of this article is to explain the basic concepts of Cox regression analysis and its application to clinical research by providing a series of examples derived 1.1. The Cox Equation. The Cox regression model is based on the hazard function. Mathematically, the Cox model is written as follows [10]: H tð Þ = H0 tð Þ × exp b1x1 + b2x2+⋯::bkxk where x1 ⋯xk represents the predictor variables and H0ðtÞ is the baseline hazard at time t, which is the hazard of an individual having the predictors set to zero. By computing the exponential of the regression coeﬃcient “b1 ⋯bk” (directly provided by the software), we can calculate the HR of a given risk factor or predictor in the model. For example, if the risk factor x1 is dichotomous and it is codi- ﬁed “1” if present (exposed) and “0” if absent (unexposed), the expression expðbiÞ (where exp = 2:7183) can be inter- preted as the estimated increase in the HR of the event in patients with the risk factor compared to those without the same risk factor; this is applied by assuming exposed and unexposed patients are similar for all the other covariates included in the model. If the risk factor is a continuous var- iable and it is directly related to the incidence rate of a given event (e.g., age in years as a risk factor for mortality), the HR will be interpreted as an increase in the hazard rate of death due to a 1-year increase in age. Thus, if a study reports a HR of 1.03 for age, it implies that the hazard rate of the event of interest increases by 3% for each year increase in age. If the risk factor is a continuous variable and it is inversely related to the incidence rate of a given event (e.g., albumin in g/dL, a protective biomarker of nutritional status, as a predictor of death), the HR associated with albumin is interpreted as the decrease of the hazard rate of the event due to a 1 g/dL increase in albumin. Thus, if a study reports a HR of albumin of 0.85, it implies that the hazard rate of the event decreases by 15% for each 1 g/dL increase in albumin. 2. The Hazard Ratio and Incidence Rate Ratio We interpret the HR similarly to the incidence rate ratio (IRR); thus, the best way to describe this measure is to pro- vide an example of an IRR calculation [11]. Consider a hypothetical randomized clinical trial to test the eﬃcacy of a generic drug X on 1-year mortality among cardiovascular disease patients. For simplicity, we will explain this concept based on data from ﬁve patients in the intervention arm and ﬁve patients in the control arm. During the follow-up period (1 year), in the control arm, patient B was lost to fol- low-up, patient C died after 6 months, and patients A, D, and E completed the follow-up period (Figure 1(a)). In the intervention arm, patient G was lost to follow-up, patient H died at the end of the study (i.e., after 1 year), and patients F, I, and L completed the follow-up period (Figure 1(b)). To assess the risk of mortality in each study arm, we calculated the probability of death in both the control (1/5 = 0:20 or 20%) and the active (1/5 = 0:20 or 20%) arms; for this, the risk ratio will equal to 1. It is evident that the risk ratio cal- culation does not capture the fact that the event of interest (death) occurred later in the active (at 1 year) than in the control arm (at 6 months). Therefore, we should calculate the incidence rate to estimate the frequency of death in the two study groups. In this case, the incidence rate of death in the two study arms is the ratio between the number of deaths and the total person-time (i.e., the sum of the times of observation of all patients) in each arm. The incidence rate among the control group is 1/4 = 0:25 deaths/person- year (i.e., 25 deaths per 100 persons-year), and the incidence rate among the intervention group is 1/4:5 = 0:22 deaths per person-year (i.e., 22 deaths per 100 persons-year). The inci- dence rate calculation shows that mortality occurs earlier in the control group compared to in the active group; this is illustrated by the higher incidence rate among control patients than active patients (25 versus 22 deaths per 100 persons-year). The IRR is calculated by dividing the incidence rate of death among the intervention group and the incidence rate of death among the control group (22/25 = 0:88); the IRR of 0.88 means that the probability of death occurring ﬁrst is 12% lower among patients in the intervention arm than in those in the control arm. Given the similarity between the two measures, the HR can be interpreted in exactly the same way as the IRR. A hypothetical cohort study was performed on 200 chronic kidney disease patients aged ≥65 years. We aimed to Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity 2572, 2021, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2021/1302811 by Turkey Cochrane Evidence Aid, Wiley Online Library on [28/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

calculate the HR of myocardial infarction among patients with high oxidative-low-density lipoprotein (LDL) versus low oxidative-LDL and test whether this relationship is inde- pendent of a history of diabetes mellitus (see Table 1). The hazard rate of myocardial infarction as a function of oxidative-LDL, using the Cox equation, can be written H tð Þ = H0t ∗exp H0t refers to the risk component due to time, and exp½b∗oxidative−LDL is the risk component due to oxidative- LDL (codiﬁed as “0” for low oxidative-LDL and “1” for high oxidative-LDL). H0t and the “b” coeﬃcient are esti- mated by the maximum likelihood function [12]. In this example, we are interested in knowing the HR of myocar- dial infarction in patients with high versus low oxidative- LDL, so we focus on the “b” coeﬃcient and ignore H0t. In our example, the value of “b” (as calculated using statis- tical software) is 1.69. By applying the general formula, we can calculate the HR using the following equation: This means that the HR of myocardial infarction is 5.44 times higher in patients with high oxidative-LDL versus those with low oxidative-LDL. Then, we test the potential confounding eﬀect of diabetes mellitus on this relationship. Diabetes is a confounder because it is associated with both death (patients with high oxidative-LDL have a higher risk of mortality compared to those with low oxidative-LDL) and oxidative-LDL (i.e., the prevalence of diabetes is signiﬁ- cantly higher in patients with high oxidative-LDL than those with low oxidative-LDL). The Cox equation now includes two variables: oxidative-LDL and diabetes: H tð Þ = H0t ∗exp The introduction of diabetes into the Cox model includ- ing oxidative-LDL yields a reduction in the regression coef- ﬁcient of oxidative-LDL from 1.69 to 0.92. In the same equation, the regression coeﬃcient of diabetes is 0.18. Thus, the HR of oxidative-LDL adjusted for diabetes is HRoxidative−LDL = 2:7183 0:92 Therefore, the diabetes-adjusted HR of myocardial infarction is 2.5 times higher in patients with high oxidative-LDL than in those with low oxidative-LDL. By using the same formula, we can calculate the oxidative-LDL-adjusted HR of diabetes. HRdiabetes mellitus = 2:7183 0:18 Figure 1: Hypothetical example of an incidence rate calculation (see text for more details). Table 1: Baseline characteristics of 200 chronic kidney disease patients. (0: low and 1: high) (0: no and 1: yes) (0: no and 1: yes) Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity 2572, 2021, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2021/1302811 by Turkey Cochrane Evidence Aid, Wiley Online Library on [28/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Thus, the oxidative-LDL-adjusted HR of myocardial infarction is 20% higher in diabetics than in nondiabetics. A prospective population-based study by Spoto et al. [13] was conducted to assess the eﬀect of gamma glutamyl trans- ferase (GGT) on the risk of all-cause mortality among Italian people older than 65 years and free from liver disease (n = 1,038). The median follow-up duration was 9 years (range 0.15–10.5 years). During the follow-up period, 401 subjects died. Crude and adjusted Cox regression analyses were performed to test the possible association between serum GGT and all-cause mortality. Multiple Cox regression models included serum GGT as a continuous variable as well as tradi- tional risk factors (age, sex, smoking status, diabetes, LDL cho- lesterol, systolic blood pressure (SBP), and past cardiovascular (CV) events), hepatic disease-related factors (transaminases (AST/ALT), alkaline phosphatase (Alk_P), and alcohol con- sumption), body mass index (BMI), hemoglobin, oxidized LDL, C-reactive protein (CRP), homocysteine, and creatinine clearance. (Table 2) The authors constructed a model with adequate statistical power by introducing approximately one covariate into the model for every 22 patients who died. As shown in Table 2, based on the crude analysis, a 20U/L increase in serum GGT signaled a parallel 10% increase in the risk of all-cause mortality (HR 1.10, 95% CI 1.03–1.18, and P = 0:007). An adjustment for all potential confounders between GGT and mortality (HR 1.11, 95% CI 1.02–1.21, and P = 0:02, Table 2). The study concluded that serum GGT is an independent risk factor for all-cause mortality among the elderly population. A prospective longitudinal cohort study was conducted among 94 patients with primary angle-closure glaucoma (PACG) and 89 normal controls, who were followed up for 2 years (periodic visits every 6 months); the study is aimed at identifying the baseline oxidative stress-related factors predicting the progression of PACG [14]. In univariate Cox regression analyses, the female gender (P = 0:048), ante- rior chamber depth (P = 0:049), superoxide dismutase (SOD, P = 0:005), total antioxidant status (TAS, P < 0:001), and malondialdehyde (MDA, P = 0:008) were identiﬁed as signiﬁcant predictors of the study end point. In a multivari- able regression model, the females had a two-fold risk for developing PACG compared to males (HR = 2:228, 95% CI: 1.013–4.897, and P = 0:046), independently of all other factors. Higher levels of MDA (HR (1μmol/l): 1.010; 95% CI: 1.001–1.018, P = 0:015), lower levels of SOD (HR (1U/mL): 0.983; 95% CI: 0.971–0.994, and P = 0:003), and TAS (HR: 0.041; 95% CI: 0.008–0.218, and P < 0:001) were inde- pendently associated with the progression of PACG, as measured with the visual ﬁeld (Figure 2) [14]. Table 2: Multiple Cox regression models of all-cause mortality. (95% CI), P value Hazard ratio (95% CI), P value 1.11 (1.02–1.21), P = 0:02 1.13 (1.11–1.15), P < 0:001 1.26 (0.98–1.63), P = 0:08 1.93 (1.43–2.63), P < 0:001 1.01 (0.98–1.04), P = 0:49 0.99 (0.98–0.99), P = 0:007 1.01 (1.01–1.02), P = 0:006 1.01 (0.99–1.01), P = 0:17 1.00 (1.00–1.01), P = 0:01 1.04 (0.96–1.13), P = 0:32 0.99 (0.98–0.99), P = 0:03 1.01 (0.99–1.04), P = 0:26 0.98 (0.96–0.99), P = 0:01 1.17 (0.85–1.61), P = 0:35 1.00 (0.99–1.01), P = 0:80 1.01 (0.99–1.02), P = 0:18 1.48 (1.15–1.92), P = 0:002 1.02 (1.00–1.03), P = 0:002 Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity 2572, 2021, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2021/1302811 by Turkey Cochrane Evidence Aid, Wiley Online Library on [28/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

In a study of patients with end-stage renal disease, Zoccali et al. [15] investigated the relationship between systolic dys- function (as assessed by left ventricular ejection fraction, LVEF) and the incidence rate of fatal and nonfatal cardio- vascular (CV) events. In a multiple Cox regression model, a 1% decrease in LVEF signaled a 4% increase in the hazard rate of fatal and nonfatal CV events (HR: 1.04, 95% CI: 1.02– 1.07, and P = 0:001) independently of a series of potential confounders, including age, gender, antihypertensive treat- ment, smoking, CRP, and SBP. To assess whether the link between LVEF and fatal and nonfatal CV events could be explained by the confounding eﬀect of the left ventricular mass index (LVMI, a variable closely related to both LVEF and fatal and nonfatal CV events), the authors included this biomarker in the multiple Cox regression model. The rela- tionship between LVEF and fatal and nonfatal CV events remained statistically signiﬁcant after adjusting for LVMI. The authors concluded that studying myocardial contractil- ity by echocardiography provides etiological information independently of LVMI and other risk factors in ESRD. The Cox regression analysis is a fundamental statistical method for addressing etiological and prognostic hypothe- ses. It is based on estimating the HR associated with a speciﬁc risk factor or predictor for a given endpoint. Inter- pretation of the HR crucially depends on the units of mea- surement of each variable in the model. The number of covariates tested by the Cox method must account for the number of patients with the event of interest. The standard Cox regression method allows for an investiga- tion of the eﬀect of one or more variables (covariates) on the “time-to-ﬁrst-event” analysis. An assessment of proportional hazards is a prerequisite to ﬁtting a Cox regression model. In survival analysis, both Kaplan–Meier analysis and Cox regression methods are used to address etiological and prognostic hypotheses in clinical and epide- All data supporting the results of this paper are presented. The authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest. Samar Abd ElHafeez and Graziella D’Arrigo equally contrib- uted to this work. [1] R. Singh and K. Mukhopadhyay, “Survival analysis in clinical trials: basics and must know areas,” Perspectives in Clinical Research, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 145–148, 2011. [2] M. K. Goel, P. Khanna, and J. Kishore, “Understanding Journal of Ayurveda Research, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 274–278, [3] V. S. Stel, F. W. Dekker, G. Tripepi, C. Zoccali, and K. J. Jager, “Survival analysis I: the Kaplan-Meier method,” Nephron Clinical Practice, vol. 119, no. 1, pp. c83–c88, [4] G. Tripepi, K. J. Jager, F. W. Dekker, and C. Zoccali, “Testing for causality and prognosis: etiological and prognostic models,” Kidney International, vol. 74, no. 12, pp. 1512– [5] J. In and D. K. Lee, “Survival analysis: part I - analysis of time- to-event,” Korean Journal of Anesthesiology, vol. 71, no. 3, [6] D. R. Cox, “Regression models and life-tables,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 187–202, 1972. [7] M. J. Bradburn, T. G. Clark, S. B. Love, and D. G. Altman, “Survival analysis part II: multivariate data analysis – an intro- duction to concepts and methods,” British Journal of Cancer, vol. 89, no. 3, pp. 431–436, 2003. [8] V. Bewick, L. Cheek, and J. Ball, “Statistics review 12: sur- vival analysis,” Critical Care, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 389–394, [9] S. L. Spruance, J. E. Reid, M. Grace, and M. Samore, “Hazard ratio in clinical trials,” Antimicrobial Agents and Chemother- apy, vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 2787–2792, 2004. [10] P. C. van Dijk, K. J. Jager, A. H. Zwinderman, C. Zoccali, and F. W. Dekker, “The analysis of survival data in nephrology: basic concepts and methods of Cox regression,” Kidney inter- national, vol. 74, no. 6, pp. 705–709, 2008. [11] M. A. Hernán, “The hazards of hazard ratios,” Epidemiology, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 13–15, 2010. [12] V. S. Stel, F. W. Dekker, G. Tripepi, C. Zoccali, and K. J. Jager, “Survival analysis II: Cox regression,” Nephron Clinical Prac- tice, vol. 119, no. 3, pp. c255–c260, 2011. [13] B. Spoto, G. D’Arrigo, G. Tripepi, D. Bolignano, and C. Zoccali, “Serum gamma-glutamyltransferase, oxidized LDL and mortality in the elderly,” Aging Clinical and Experimental Research, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1393–1397, HR and 95% CI Figure 2: Forest plot of the hazard ratios for the risk factors associated with visual ﬁeld progression in the paper by Li et al. [14]. Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity 2572, 2021, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2021/1302811 by Turkey Cochrane Evidence Aid, Wiley Online Library on [28/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

[14] S. Li, M. Shao, Y. Li et al., “Relationship between oxidative stress biomarkers and visual ﬁeld progression in patients with primary angle closure glaucoma,” Oxidative Medicine and Cel- lular Longevity, vol. 2020, Article ID 2701539, 11 pages, 2020. [15] C. Zoccali, F. A. Benedetto, F. Mallamaci et al., “Prognostic value of echocardiographic indicators of left ventricular sys- tolic function in asymptomatic dialysis patients,” Journal of the American Society of Nephrology, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1029– Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity 2572, 2021, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2021/1302811 by Turkey Cochrane Evidence Aid, Wiley Online Library on [28/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

---NEW PAPER---

Technological Forecasting & Social Change 181 (2022) 121740 Available online 17 May 2022 0040-1625/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- A preliminary assessment of the performance of DeFi cryptocurrencies in relation to other financial assets, volatility, and user-generated content Juan Pi˜neiro-Chousa a,*, M. ´Angeles L´opez-Cabarcos b, Aleksandar Sevic c, Isaac Gonz´alez- a Accounting and Finance at Santiago de Compostela University, Spain b Business Administration at Santiago de Compostela University, Spain c Accounting and Finance at Trinity College of Dublin, Ireland d Santiago de Compostela University, Spain A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T After the so-called “crypto-winter”, decentralised finance (DeFi) is reviving interest in cryptocurrency amongst the scientific community, public and private institutions, and investors. DeFi is a novel disruptive process that promotes the use of blockchain technology for creating and issuing all kinds of financial products and services. This study aimed to measure the relationship amongst the returns of DeFi tokens, other traditional assets, and user-generated content. While the relationship between other crypto assets and traditional assets has been researched, this has not been done on DeFi assets. This study uses a logit-probit model over a database comprising the daily returns of 13 DeFi, VIX, S&P GSCI Crude Oil Index, and S&P GSCI Gold Index, and the daily variation in DeFi mentions in Telegram chats and Twitter. The results show that all variables except the S&P GSCI crude oil index returns and the daily variation in Twitter mentions were significant. This suggests that DeFi acts, similar to other crypto assets, as a safe haven. This study contributes to the literature on decentralised finance tokens as investment assets, which requires much more research. The financial crisis of 2007 had an unexpected effect; an unknown hacker published a paper (Nakamoto, 2008) describing an unsupervised digital currency with the aim of avoiding the need for a central au­ thority. After this paper (Nakamoto, 2008), Satoshi released an open-source software that started Bitcoin as a decentralised digital cryptocurrency. The lack of central governance is a key feature that attracts interest and at the same time raises concerns about its risks (Grant and Hogan, 2015). The cost of avoiding a central node increased when Bitcoin began to increase in popularity because of electricity consumption (Fairley, 2017). The increase in transaction fees to keep mining profitable makes it unusable as a payment system for small amounts of money. Satoshi’s paper talks about “electronic cash” to make “electronic payments”, but in reality after years of being in use, Bitcoin is mainly used as an asset (Baur et al., 2018), either comparable with gold (Dyhrberg, 2016) or not (Klein et al., 2018). Over the years, Bitcoin has gained attention and market share. Another hacker published a white paper describing a blockchain of smart contracts called Ethereum (Buterin et al., 2014), which is a disruptive technology that can act as a digital, immutable, and programmable public agreement. This new technology has huge implications in mitigating informational asymme­ try, enhancing competition, and improving consumer welfare; yet, it may also lead to collusion (Cong and He, 2019). The appearance of altcoins provided an alternative investment op­ portunity. A good and popular example in Ethereum is an initial coin offering (ICO). An ICO acts as an initial public offering (IPO) of cryp­ tocurrencies worldwide. It serves as an early-stage crowdfunding method to raise funds for a new cryptocurrency before they are publicly traded (Gans and Catalini, 2018). Ethereum released the ERC20 feature, adding the possibility of creating new cryptocurrencies easily over the Ethereum blockchain. This led to an explosion of ICOs and signs of a bubble, but also great returns in compensation for the assumed risks (Benedetti and Kosto­ vetsky, 2021). This generated great volatility in the stock market (Akyildirim et al., 2020). ICOs grew exponentially from 2015 to the second quarter of 2018. The highest amount of USD 6 billion was raised in the first quarter of 2018. After that, sales dropped remarkably, E-mail address: j.pineiro@usc.es (J. Pi˜neiro-Chousa). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Technological Forecasting & Social Change Received 25 August 2021; Received in revised form 4 May 2022; Accepted 8 May 2022

Technological Forecasting & Social Change 181 (2022) 121740 coinciding with the development of law enforcement actions in many countries worldwide. Thus, the exponential growth of ICOs accompa­ nied by the rise in problems related to security and investor protection led to increasingly concerned reactions by public and private regulators (Domingo et al., 2020). The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) started to consider tokens as a possible asset under securities regulation, in practice banning US citizens from investing (Hacker and Thomale, 2018). Security token offering (STO) appeared as an alternative to ICOs, because it complies with regional regulators, but the amount of capital raised by STOs is far lower than that of ICOs. Almost simultaneously, in the beginning of 2018, Bitcoin suffered depreciation. The depreciation of the value of Bitcoin, depreciation of ETH, and demise of the ICO market led to the so-called crypto winter. Finance professionals who used ICOs to develop Ethereum-based financial products led the emergence of the DeFi market in the begin­ ning of 2020. DeFi financial products built into Ethereum smart con­ tracts play a significant role in the development of the Ethereum network. It is believed that they will likely continue to play an increasingly significant role in the future (Wulf, 2020). The purpose of this research is to study the relationship between DeFi tokens, traditional assets, and user-generated content. DeFi is a very new technology, and very few studies based on volatility have been con­ ducted. Therefore, this is a preliminary study of this new field. We use a dataset comprising the daily returns of 13 DeFi, VIX, S&P GSCI Crude Oil Index, S&P GSCI Gold Index, and the daily variation of DeFi mentions in Telegram chats and Twitter, over the study period covering 1 July 2018–27 July 2020. After thoroughly describing the decentralised finance from different perspectives and angles in relation to traditional finance, this study aims to analyse the influence of the variables mentioned on DeFi returns. This study contributes to the advancement of knowledge on this novel topic by examining the impact of selected sentiment variables, such as Telegram chats and Twitter mentions, on DeFi returns. The results of this study can guide policymakers as well as public and private investors in their decisions towards more efficient This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides the theoretical framework and formulates the hypotheses; Section 3 describes the method, including the sample, variables, and model; Section 4 presents the main empirical results; Section 5 discusses the results; Section 6 presents the implications; and Section 7 provides the conclusion and From a broad perspective, DeFi refers to a recent disruptive process that promotes the use of blockchain technology, smart contracts, decentralised ledgers, and applications based on open protocols or modular frameworks for creating and issuing all kinds of financial products and services. Ethereum and other smart contract platforms allow any code to be run using blockchain technology. This opens the possibility of creating decentralised applications (Dapps), decentralised autonomous organisationsDecentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs), and decentralised financial services (DeFi). The financial and technical complexity is much higher than that of the ICOs based on ERC20, but the efforts, funding, and interest in the crypto community during these years seem to open a new and exciting possibility for The term decentralised finance is very wide because most blockchain projects are decentralised by definition, and any cryptocurrency (e.g. Bitcoin) can be categorised as a financial asset (Baur et al., 2018). In all its nuances, most of the literature considers DeFi as the replication of financial services over blockchain. Some authors provide a more precise categorisation of the services (Gudgeon et al., 2020; Sch¨ar, 2020; Katona 2021), while others have a broader focus (Chen and Bellavitis, 2020). Still, some others focus on specific interoperability services like oracles (Liu et al., 2020). Undoubtedly, the amount of money locked in DeFi smart contracts is growing exponentially, from USD 1 billion in June 2020, to USD 2 billion in July 2020, and to USD 4 billion in August 2020. The tradeable tokens behind the DeFi projects surpassed USD 10 billion in market capitalisation. In other words, the use of these new services seems to be exploding, together with the market value of or­ ganisations related to decentralised finance. 2.2. Decentralised financial services Lending and borrowing are services defined by a smart contract asking for, or offering, cryptocurrencies paying or earning an interest rate, respectively. Platforms such as Aave, Compound, Yearn finance, Just, or Kava offer these services in the form of loans or flash loans. Loans require borrowers to over guarantee their loans, allowing the lender to redeem pledged collateral in the event of default by the borrower. Flash loans allow borrowing without a guarantee because the atomicity of the smart contract protects the loaned amount. Therefore, a loan not repaid with interest means that the whole transaction will be reversed (Gudgeon et al., 2020; Sch¨ar, 2020). Flash loans are not easily comparable to traditional services because they rely on the power of smart contracts. For example, if someone with a small amount of money wants to buy a house and sell it immediately in the same operation, they could use a flash loan, avoiding the need to have all the money required by the operation. Although they are becoming popular for arbitrage operations, they have safety problems (Qin et al., 2020) because of at­ tacks related to oracle manipulation and the pump and arbitrage Stablecoins are crypto assets with a price-stabilization mechanism pegged to cryptocurrency, fiat money, or exchange-traded commodities. USDT and USDC are cryptocurrencies paired with a dollar but central­ ised, as each USDT or USDC is backed by a USD. When stablecoins are backed by another cryptocurrency and regulated by smart contracts, they are considered decentralised or DeFi. The most popular stablecoin is DAI. One DAI is equated to one USD and uses a stabilisation mecha­ nism to protect against volatility. In fact, to borrow DAIs, a user must pledge an over-guaranteed number of cryptocurrencies. When the price of DAI differs from that of its peg, arbitrageurs are incentivised to buy or sell DAI to compensate for supply and demand movements. If the collateral cryptocurrency devaluates in relation to the USD, the borrower must increase the amount of collateral to keep the ratio above some liquidation threshold; otherwise, the borrow position will be liquidated at a discount, and a penalty fee will be charged (Qin et al., Exchanges are key components of blockchain ecosystems. They allow changes between fiat and cryptocurrency, and are the main entrance of cryptocurrencies. Some of them offer more products, such as staking, options, or derivatives, and they have initial exchange offerings (IEOs), which is their own version of ICOs. IEOs are centralised, and their effi­ ciency is based on trust in the exchange operator, because to trade in them, traders must deposit assets in the exchange account, which can be accessed by the centralised exchanges. DeFi proposed decentralised exchange (DEX) as an alternative to centralised exchanges. In DEX, users maintain control of their assets instead of the exchange account. Trade execution occurs atomically through a smart contract in which both parties trade around one indivisible transaction (Sch¨ar, 2020). This mode of operation removes intermediaries and adds transparency, but it also demands interoperability with other services such as oracles or lending to have liquidity. Balancer, Uniswap, 0x, Kiber network, Bancor, and Loopring are examples of actual decentralised exchanges. Decentralised derivatives are tokens that derive their value from the performance of an underlying asset, the result of an event, or the behaviour of any other observable variable (Sch¨ar, 2020). Synthetix is a derivative liquidity protocol on Ethereum which allows for the issuance and trading of synthetic assets. Each synthetic asset (SYNTH) is an J. Pi˜neiro-Chousa et al.

Technological Forecasting & Social Change 181 (2022) 121740 ERC20 token that replicates external asset prices and uses smart contract infrastructure underpinned by the Synthetix Network Token (SNX) as collateral. Interested parties are rewarded for their support of the system with a proportional share of the fees generated by the activity. Conse­ quently, the SNX value is directly related to the use of the network it Oracles are systems that provide trustworthy information from the real world (off-chain) to blockchain (on-chain). They are not services for the end-user, but are crucial for the DeFi ecosystem. Oracles provide real-time information about assets used as collateral and redemptions, such as market prices. As price is very volatile, the security of many DeFi systems relies on oracles. An oracle introduces data into a smart contract from a third-party source, assuring veracity in different ways (Liu et al., 2020). The most successful project in this area was Chainlink (LINK). It raised money from an ICO in 2017 at a price of USD 0.11 per token, and at the time this paper was written (August, 2020), the price of each token was 150 times higher (USD 16.87). 2.4. DeFi objectives and challenges The main objective of decentralised finance is to provide financial services over the blockchain in a decentralised manner. As DeFi origi­ nated from blockchain systems, it seems that everything is already decentralised by default, but this is not true. Some operations still need to be performed by external agents, and users must trust them to use the service. Thus, DeFi can be understood as a step further in the decen­ Innovation is the key to achieving these services in a technical and economic sense. On the one hand, smart contract technology over blockchains (mainly Ethereum) and other platforms is a very novel technology that is still in the early stages of development. This tech­ nology congregates top-minded engineers working in a completely new field related to computer science, knowing that they have the huge task of improving the technology while maintaining compatibility, func­ tionality, and with an immutable history of data and code releases. On the other hand, economic innovation redefines traditional economy in a completely new ecosystem, changing the sense of value, trust, coin, equity, or lending. The impact of economic innovation and specifically of DeFi on traditional economies, companies, and financial decision- makers will, in turn, bring more innovation in this field. The implica­ tions need to be carefully analysed. Based on the experience with ICOs and their decline, countries’ regulations have had an important role that now DeFi wants to surpass. As everything is on-chain and regulated through smart contracts, ano­ nymity allows movement beyond the bounds of government regulations. DeFi may not be a success, but one of its main objectives is to be bor­ derless. The obsession with smart contracts arose from the pursuit of transparency by DeFi. In this sense, as a smart contract is an open-source code, immutable when executed on a blockchain (even creators cannot change it), DeFi projects act as ‘glass boxes’ as everybody can see inside. DeFi is sometimes defined as a layered structure composed of settlement (e.g. Ethereum), asset (e.g. ERC20), protocol (e.g. Uniswap), application (e.g. Uniswap interface), and aggregation (e.g. Uniswap used by the third party) (Sch¨ar, 2020). To make it possible for all these elements to interact properly, considering the technical complexity of smart con­ tracts, interoperability has become one objective to achieve in DeFi These objectives, namely innovation, decentralisation, border­ lessness, transparency, and interoperability (Chen and Bellavitis, 2020), act as a lever to push DeFi forward. DeFi seems to be a big step toward the decentralisation of value, but it faces many challenges that could limit its expansion. These challenges, which are also blockchain challenges, should be addressed in this new crypto project. These include fraud, volatility, usability, regulatory un­ certainty, privacy, building distributed trust, use of inflexible systems, lack of accountability, and lack of human presence (Chen and Bellavitis, 2020; Qin et al., 2020). Safety problems have already appeared and it is easy to predict that they will continue to appear in the future. They can be in any part of the software; however, the magnitude of the security systems determines their impact on the ecosystem. During the ICO rush, some scams and bad practices appeared, and although DeFi is more transparent, technical and financial innovations could open doors to fraud, which can result in a “cost of dishonesty” (Domingo et al., 2020). Another important chal­ lenge relates to transparency, as it has a counterpart in possible privacy problems. If everything is recorded on public ledgers, there is anonymity but not necessarily privacy. All of this bears on the future of any project based on cryptocurrencies as it is always under the threat of government regulations, for example, by banning or constraining their use, similar to what happened to ICOs. Other challenges refer to the fact that decen­ tralised financial services are consumed using digital applications, and it is common for a new software to lack usability, especially when dealing with very complex systems. In contrast, most DeFi cryptocurrencies are recent and have modest market caps, which can generate a lot of vola­ tility when a sudden interest or disinterest occurs. Finally, the use of smart contracts ensures that it is not possible to change what is executed, even if both parties agree to a change. This means that human judge­ ment does not count after a smart contract is released, which imposes important decision limitations. At this point, one question arises: if there is no central organisation responsible for the service, who is responsible for any error or failure? Fig. 1 2.5. DeFi as an investment opportunity A good way to measure how DeFi projects are progressing is to examine the behaviour of its tradeable tokens. Tradeable tokens, often called cryptocurrencies, are used for governance, utility, security, or a combination of these for a given crypto project. Interest in a crypto project could lead a token to undergo variations in supply or demand and hence, in its price. Moreover, because cryptocurrencies are financial assets, they could be related to traditional assets as a significant part of their portfolio stocks (Gil-Alana et al., 2020). Some authors compared major cryptocurrencies and found evidence of integration in the prices of some altcoins, similar to what happens with stock indices (Gil-Alana et al., 2020). Other authors have created a value index of crypto­ currencies that persistently cross-correlates with the Dow-Jones Indus­ trial Average (Zhang et al., 2018). Previous research compared the value of certain cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin and gold, reporting mixed results (Dyhrberg, 2016; Klein et al., 2018). Similarly, other studies suggest that there is a relationship between cryptocurrencies and broadly-defined commodity markets, such as energy, metals, and agri­ culture (Ji et al., 2019). More recently, a broader analysis based on the time and frequency domains found no relationship between the three largest cryptocurrencies and various other financial assets (Corbet et al., Accordingly, more research is needed, and the following hypothesis : Stock market volatility influences DeFi returns 2.6. Gold and oil in relation to crypto assets The relationship between cryptocurrencies and gold has been and still is a very controversial topic. Some studies have demonstrated a correlation between Bitcoin and gold (Dyhrberg, 2016), but others (Klein et al., 2018) have not observed this correlation. One of the main ideas behind these studies is the possible use of Bitcoin as a gold-like asset, which is investment-safe. However, cryptocurrencies are beyond Bitcoin. Some studies include other cryptocurrencies, such as Ethereum J. Pi˜neiro-Chousa et al.

Technological Forecasting & Social Change 181 (2022) 121740 or Ripple (Beneki et al., 2019) but focus on volatility spillovers or bear markets (Kyriazis et al., 2019). Studies on other individual crypto­ currencies or class-grouped cryptocurrencies are lacking. The same is true of the relationship between cryptocurrencies and oil. Al-Yahyaee et al. (2019) studied the relationship between the volatility of Bitcoin and oil markets, while Okorie and Lin (2020) focused on the volatility of some top cryptocurrencies and oil as a hedge for investors. Similarly, Yin et al. (2021) studied hedges, but in the particular case of oil market shocks. These studies showed a certain relationship between the volatility of oil and some cryptocurrencies, but the economic implications focused on hedges and portfolio manage­ ment. We were unable to find studies that compared gold, oil assets, and DeFi tokens. Therefore, the following hypotheses are proposed: : DeFi return is influenced by energy sources such as oil (S&P GSCI : A DeFi is a safe asset, and its return is positively associated with the returns on other safe assets such as gold (S&P GSCI Gold Index). 2.7. Role of user-generated content in crypto assets User-generated content (UGC) can be broadly materialised (e.g. wikis, evaluation websites, blogs, social media instant messaging apps) in different types of content formats (e.g. text, photo, videos, games) with countless purposes (e.g. entertainment, social-political campaigns, getting updated). Several researchers have analysed the diverse roles of UGC in the blockchain domain. Mai et al. (2018) used tweets and forum posts to forecast Bitcoin movement. Guske and Bendig (2018) found a relationship between the number of Twitter messages and the amount of funding raised. Rohr and Wright (2019) argued that the promoter or seller of a token often establishes communication centres (via slack, telegram, or message boards) to keep interested parties informed. Recently, Domingo et al. (2020) found that sentiment extracted from social networks positively influences ICO returns. To the best of our knowledge, no study has analysed the influence of UGC, namely, Tele­ gram and Twitter, on DeFi returns. Hence, the following hypotheses are : Public user-generated content in Twitter influences DeFi returns. : Private user-generated content in Telegram influences DeFi As previously mentioned, the crypto landscape has changed over time, starting with Bitcoin, followed by smart contracts and initial coin offerings. Currently, DeFi is the main focus of change. Their novelty and limited evaluation of implications can generate a lot of volatility, mainly if certain events trigger a huge interest or disinterest and, consequently, huge price movements. Therefore, it is necessary to carefully analyse the relationship between DeFi volatility and stock market volatility measured through the Chicago Board Options Exchange Market Fig. 1. DeFi’s services, objectives, and challenges. Source: Own elaboration. J. Pi˜neiro-Chousa et al.

Technological Forecasting & Social Change 181 (2022) 121740 Volatility Index to better understand DeFi behaviour. The mixed results obtained by previous research and the lack of studies analysing the re­ lationships between DeFi returns and stock market volatility or com­ modities such as gold or oil demand more scientific research. 3.1. Data and variables The database used in the analysis comprises the daily returns of DeFi, VIX, S&P GSCI crude oil index, S&P GSCI gold index, and the daily variation of DeFi mentions in Telegram chats and Twitter. The DeFi data, including social media mentions, were downloaded from Santi­ ment.net. Santiment.net is a website and a crypto-based project that gathers data about cryptocurrencies – price, development activity, de­ rivatives, or social media mentions, such as Twitter and Telegram. S&P GSCI Gold Index data were provided by the S&P Dow Jones Indices®. The VIX and S&P GSCI crude oil index data were downloaded from Initially, we obtained data from 29 DeFi. We drop a DeFi from the sample if they have been unlisted for a long time. We also excluded DeFi, which only began in 2019 or 2020. Finally, we used a dataset consisting of 13 DeFi with returns from 1 July 2018 to 27 July 2020. The daily returns of DeFi were calculated as: Rnit = (Pnit −Pnit−1)/Pnit−1 where Pnit is the closing price of DeFi at moment t. This method was chosen because several DeFi have a closing price between 0 and 1, which makes it impossible to calculate returns following Campbell et al. However, the daily returns of the VIX, S&P GSCI crude oil index, and S&P GSCI gold index were calculated following Campbell et al. Rit = ln(Pit) −ln(Pit−1) where Pit is the closing price of index i (VIX, S&P GSCI Crude Oil Index, or S&P GSCI Gold Index) at moment t. VIX, S&P GSCI Crude Oil Index, and S&P GSCI Gold Index have trading days without trade (Saturday and Sunday), but DeFi has trades in those days. Thus, we suppose that VIX, S&P GSCI Crude Oil Index, and S&P GSCI Gold Index have the same closing prices on days without trade as the last day with trade (Friday). The daily variation of the mentions was calculated as follows: TEit = (TEit −TEit−1)/TEit−1 TWit = (TWit −TWit−1)/TWit−1 where TEit is the number of mentions in the Telegram chats of DeFi i at moment t, and TWit is the number of mentions in Twitter of DeFi i at Descriptive statistics for panel data with 9854 observations are presented in Table 1. The references in Telegram chats and Twitter have a lower number of observations because there are no mentions every day and because of the daily variation calculation. DeFi returns are repre­ sented by a dichotomous variable, where ‘1′ is for positive or zero returns, and ‘0′ for negative returns. To measure the relationship between assets in a nonlinear way, we use a logit-probit model, a widely used econometric method (Lennox, 1999). This nonlinear methodology has been applied to stocks and volatility by Thomas et al. (2014) and many others. We will take into consideration the results in the same way as other authors have done This method allows us to test how financial market movements in­ fluence DeFi returns. The following logit-probit model was proposed: Rnit = β0 + β1Rvit + β2Rcit + β3Rgit + β4TEit + β5TWit + εt where Rnit represents the daily returns of DeFi (dichotomous variable), Rvit is the daily return of VIX, Rcit represents the daily returns of the S&P GSCI crude oil index, Rgit is the daily returns of the S&P GSCI Gold Index, TEit is the daily variation of mentions in Telegram chats, and TWit rep­ resents the daily variation of mentions on Twitter. Both probit and logit models were estimated using a population- averaged estimator. This means that the β measures the change in pro­ portion to y = 1 for a unit increase in x (Neuhaus et al., 1991). Table 2 shows the correlations between the variables. The VIX and variation in Twitter mentions are negatively correlated with DeFi returns. This suggests that when volatility increases, DeFi returns decrease, and vice versa. In contrast, Twitter and Telegram chat refer­ ences are positively correlated to DeFi returns. That is, an increase in Twitter or Telegram mentions could cause an increase in DeFi returns. Furthermore, the correlations between the S&P GSCI crude oil index returns and S&P GSCI gold index returns are positive, suggesting that an increase in these indices could cause an increase in DeFi returns. These suggest that DeFi movements are similar to market movements. Table 3 shows the logit-probit results for the whole sample. The re­ sults were similar for both regressions, with coefficient estimates for all variables except the S&P GSCI Crude Oil Index returns and the daily variation of Twitter mentions are significant. DeFi reacts inversely to market volatility (VIX), moves in the same direction as gold, while the coefficient estimate of gold is significantly higher than the coefficient estimate of VIX. Results also suggest a strong correlation between DeFi and the references in Telegram. Hausman’s test showed that best fit was obtained with the probit J. Pi˜neiro-Chousa et al.

Technological Forecasting & Social Change 181 (2022) 121740 The results suggest that DeFis can act as a safe haven, like gold. As shown by the positive correlation and significance of the logit-probit model estimates, parallelism with gold in terms of volatility is a hot topic in crypto research. Some authors such as Dyhrberg (2016) support it, while others such as Klein et al. (2018) do not. Both use GARCH methods, so this could be a methodology for future research. Indeed, our results are significant, but not in the higher range of significance, so other methodologies could help support hypothesis H3. Following the seminal article by Whaley (2000), which outlined the methodology used in calculating VIX, Diavatopoulos et al., (2007) confirmed that implied volatility is superior to realized volatility in determining future returns. Interestingly, it has also been shown that the VIX is influenced by a range of characteristics demonstrated by non-technical investors in social media (L´opez-Cabarcos et al., 2017). As implied volatility is our main interest, the VIX is an important variable to check if traditional stock volatility could be related to DeFi volatility. Our correlation and logit-probit model results support the inverse rela­ tionship, because the decrease in DeFi causes an increase in VIX, and vice versa. Our results are contrary to the findings of Lopez-Cabarcos et al. (2021) on a positive causality between VIX and returns on Bitcoin, and are more attuned to findings that VIX has a negative impact on risk premiums (Durand et al., 2011) or returns on stock indices (Giot, 2005). Here, we used the S&P GSCI Gold Index to track the COMEX gold fu­ tures. While it is widely tradeable, its close relationship with spot prices is not affected (Jena et al., 2018). The positive and statistically signifi­ cant coefficient estimate of the gold proxy implies that Dyhrberg’s (2016) claims that Bitcoin is positioned between gold, as a store value, and the US currency, and hence, can be put forward as a hedging in­ strument, could also be partially applied to DeFi. H1 and the more sig­ nificant H3 seem to reinforce the idea of a safe haven for DeFi tokens. The GSCI crude oil index showed no significant influence on the studied DeFi, indicating that H2 was not proven. Other studies comparing the influence between oil assets and Bitcoin have shown that the production of oil positively influences Bitcoin (Kaabia et al., 2020), or support the idea of Bitcoin as part of a diversified portfolio due to its low correlation with commodities, especially oil (Symitsi and Chalvat­ zis, 2019). The different time frames and methods make the comparison The relationship between volatility and user-generated content shows that the daily variation of Telegram chats mentions influence DeFi returns positively (H4). Contrary to Pinero-Chousa et al. (2021), we find that the influence of Twitter mentions is insignificant (H5). These results are in line with other studies (L´opez-Cabarcos et al., 2017), which show the influence of UGC and volatility depending on the type of investor and social network. In this study, Telegram chat groups of the DeFi project are more appealing to investors and people interested in the project. Contrastingly, Twitter is a more open platform for people with close interest in this type of project. As this is a subjective appreciation, more research can be conducted on the influence of UGC on DeFi. As was mentioned, this study makes an important contribution to the extant body of knowledge by examining the impact of selected sentiment variables on DeFi returns. Telegram chats support our claim, contrary to some previous studies, whereas Twitter is not a potential tool for trading in DeFi. While commodity markets and stock market vola­ tility are relevant in this study, the S&P 500 Index is not an important variable in determining DeFi returns. DeFi can be analysed from three perspectives: DeFi as an alternative investment asset, the communication channels of DeFi, and the utility/ In a very low or negative interest rate environment, investors are forced to take more risks or look for safe havens. Cryptocurrencies are a risky investment. However, this study found that gold influences DeFi, and VIX inversely influences DeFi. This makes DeFi a hedge against the volatility of the stock market and a safe haven. Consequently, these assets are useful in investment portfolios to balance risk and volatility. We live in the information era, and everybody can write anything on any web or platform on the internet. Telegram is a private communi­ cation channel that usually focuses on one topic, whereas Twitter is a public and multi-topic channel. According to the results of this study, information from private and topic-focused platforms is more relevant for DeFi projects in terms of its correlation with token prices. As most crypto projects are present in both channels, this study helped assess The main objective of DeFi is to remove middlemen from financial services. Its adoption has exploded and it seems to be just starting. Depending on the implications of the investment and communication perspective, DeFi can be considered either an opportunity or a threat to the existing financial system. 7. Conclusion and future research In terms of volatility, we analyse the influence of some traditional assets on some very specific crypto assets–decentralised finance tokens. As they are quite new, we thoroughly discuss these assets in the litera­ ture review. These results lead us to conclude that: (1) VIX inversely influences DeFi, (2) GSI crude oil has no influence on DeFi, and (3) the gold index influences DeFi, prompting us to claim that DeFi acts as a safe haven. This study can be added to a very broad and debated topic, and the alignment with methodologies and timeframes of other studies could be part of future research for better comparison. The results obtained in user content generation are as follows: (4) Telegram chats influence DeFi and, (5) Twitter activity does not influ­ ence DeFi. As both assets and UGC platforms change significantly over time, the conclusion should be taken as specific to this case, requiring a broader study in terms of time, assets, and platforms. As a general conclusion and taking into account that the technologies of DeFi assets are in their infancy, we can confirm there are relationships amongst some traditional assets, user-generated content, and DeFi. This influence may imply that DeFi tokens are safe havens, hedges for stock market volatility, and are linked to activity in Telegram’s private The success of decentralised finance has attracted widespread in­ terest from investors. Growth during the last months can be a sign for investors with a risk appetite looking for significant profit and a safe haven, or be included as high-risk investment instruments of a diversi­ fied portfolio. This should also be a warning for policymakers trying to avoid the situation that the ICO created several years ago. This situation of considerable returns from weak-value propositions leads to a rush of projects that lack solid foundations, or are even scams. As DeFi seems to have linked properties to some traditional investments and has the goal of recreating traditional finance services, we strongly recommend ana­ DeFi is a novel product with limited dataset availability, and changes in the regulatory environment can have an impact on out-of-sample *** significance at 1% level; ** significance at 5% level; * significance at 10% J. Pi˜neiro-Chousa et al.

Technological Forecasting & Social Change 181 (2022) 121740 results. Thus, the sample size is affected by the lack of longer time-series data. In this study, we include data from the pre-COVID 19 period, and the results could vary if analysed during and after the current health crisis. With an increase in the number of DeFi, a larger sample size is possible in the future and illiquidity issues can be addressed more meticulously. It is also advisable to include the variations in current sentiment variables and examine the introduction of new ones with the advancement of AI. In future research, it will be necessary to examine not only the COVID-19 period, but also the post-pandemic period. In summary, the DeFi landscape of projects and their behaviour as a category of crypto assets is rising and may change significantly in the future. This demands much more research effort. CRediT authorship contribution statement Juan Pi˜neiro-Chousa: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Supervision. M. ´Angeles L´opez-Cabarcos: Concep­ tualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Aleksandar Sevic: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Isaac Gonz´alez-L´opez: Conceptualization, Meth­ odology, Formal analysis, Data curation, Investigation, Writing – orig­ inal draft, Writing – review & editing. Akyildirim, E., Corbet, S., Cumming, D., Lucey, B., Sensoy, A., 2020. Riding the wave of crypto-exuberance: the potential misusage of corporate blockchain announcements. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 159, 120191 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Al-Yahyaee, K.H., Mensi, W., Al-Jarrah, I.M.W., Hamdi, A., Kang, S.H., 2019. Volatility forecasting, downside risk, and diversification benefits of bitcoin and oil and international commodity markets: a comparative analysis with yellow metal. N. Am. J. Econ. Financ. 49, 104–120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.najef.2019.04.001. Baur, D.G., Hong, K., Lee, A.D., 2018. Bitcoin: medium of exchange or speculative assets? J. Int. Financ. Mark. Inst. Money 54, 177–189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Benedetti, H.E., Kostovetsky, L., 2021. Digital tulips? Returns to investors in initial coin offerings. J. Corp. Financ. 66, 101786 https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3182169. Beneki, C., Koulis, A., Kyriazis, N.A., Papadamou, S., 2019. Investigating volatility transmission and hedging properties between bitcoin and ethereum. Res. Int. Bus. Financ. 48, 219–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ribaf.2019.01.001. Buterin, V., et al., (2014). A next-generation smart contract and decentralized application platform. White Paper 3, 37. Campbell, J.Y., Lo, A.W.C., MacKinlay, A.C., 1997. Multifactor Pricing Models. The Econometrics of Financial Markets. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA, Chen, Y., Bellavitis, C., 2020. Blockchain disruption and decentralized finance: the rise of decentralized business models. J. Bus. Ventur. Insights 13, e00151. https://doi.org/ Cong, L.W., He, Z., 2019. Blockchain disruption and smart contracts. Rev. Financ. Stud. 32 (5), 1754–1797. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhz007. Corbet, S., Meegan, A., Larkin, C., Lucey, B., Yarovaya, L., 2018. Exploring the dynamic relationships between cryptocurrencies and other financial assets. Econ. Lett. 165, Domingo, R., Pi˜neiro-Chousa, J., ´Angeles L´opez-Cabarcos, M., 2020. What factors drive returns on initial coin offerings? Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 153, 119915 https:// Durand, R.B., Lim, D., Zumwalt, J.K., 2011. Fear and the Fama-French factors. Financ. Manag. 40 (2), 409–426. https://doi-org.elib.tcd.ie/10.1111/j.1755-053X.2011.011 Dyhrberg, A.H., 2016. Bitcoin, gold and the dollar – a GARCH volatility analysis. Financ. Res. Lett. 16, 85–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2015.10.008. Fairley, P., 2017. Blockchain world - feeding the blockchain beast if bitcoin ever does go mainstream, the electricity needed to sustain it will be enormous. IEEE Spectr. 54, 36–59. https://doi.org/10.1109/mspec.2017.8048837. Retrieved from. https://sear Gans, J.S., Catalini, C., 2018. Initial coin offerings and the value of crypto tokens. Natl. Bureau Econ. Res. https://doi.org/10.3386/w24418. Gil-Alana, L.A., Abakah, E.J.A., Rojo, M.F.R., 2020. Cryptocurrencies and stock market indices. are they related? Res. Int. Bus. Financ. 51, 101063 https://doi.org/10.1016/ Giot, P., 2005. Relationships between implied volatility indexes and stock index returns. J. Portfolio Manag. 31 (3), 92–100. https://doi.org/10.3905/jpm.2005.500363. Grant, G., Hogan, R., 2015. Bitcoin: risks and controls. J. Corp. Account. Financ. 26 (5), Gudgeon, L., Werner, S., Perez, D., Knottenbelt, W.J., 2020. Defi protocols for loanable funds: interest rates, liquidity and market efficiency. In: Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies, pp. 92–112. https://doi.org/ Guske, N., Bendig, D., 2018. Cutting out the noise-costly vs. costless signals in initial coin offerings. In: Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS). San Francisco, California, USA, pp. 13–16. December. https://aisel.ai Hacker, P., Thomale, C., 2018. Crypto-securities regulation: ICOs, token sales and cryptocurrencies under EU financial law. Eur. Co. Financ. Law Rev. 15 (4), 645–696. Jena, S.K., Tiwari, A.K., Roubaud, D., 2018. Comovements of gold futures markets and the spot market: a wavelet analysis. Financ. Res. Lett. 24, 199–220. https://doi.org/ Ji, Q., Bouri, E., Roubaud, D., Kristoufek, L., 2019. Information interdependence among energy, cryptocurrency and major commodity markets. Energy Econ. 81, Kaabia, O., Abid, I., Guesmi, K., Sahut, J. (2020). How do Bitcoin price fluctuations affect crude oil markets? Gestion 2000, 37(1), 47–60. https://doi.org/10.3917/ Katona, T., 2021. Decentralized finance: the possibilities of a blockchain “Money Lego” system. Financ. Econ. Rev. 20 (1), 74–102. http://doi.org/10.33893/FER.2 Klein, T., Pham Thu, H., Walther, T., 2018. Bitcoin is not the new gold – a comparison of volatility, correlation, and portfolio performance. Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 59, Kyriazis, N.A., Daskalou, K., Arampatzis, M., Prassa, P., Papaioannou, E., 2019. Estimating the volatility of cryptocurrencies during bearish markets by employing GARCH models. Heliyon 5 (8), e02239. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019. Lennox, C., 1999. Identifying failing companies: a re-evaluation of the logit, probit and DA approaches. J. Econ. Bus. 51 (4), 347–364. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0148-6195 Liu, B., Szalachowski, P., Zhou, J., 2021. A first look into defi oracles. In: IEEE International Conference on Decentralized Applications and Infrastructures (DAPPS), pp. 39–48. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2005.04377. -August. L´opez-Cabarcos, M.´A., Pi˜neiro-Chousa, J., P´erez-Pico, A.M., 2017. The impact technical and non-technical investors have on the stock market: evidence from the sentiment extracted from social networks. J. Behav. Exp. Financ. 15, 15–20. https://doi.org/ L´opez-Cabarcos, M.´A., P´erez-Pico, A.M., Pi˜neiro-Chousa, J., ˇSevi´c, A., 2021. Bitcoin volatility, stock market and investor sentiment. Are they connected? Financ. Res. Lett. 38, 101399 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2019.101399. Mai, F., Shan, Z., Bai, Q., Wang, X., Chiang, R.H.L., 2018. How does social media impact bitcoin value? A test of the silent majority hypothesis. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 35 (1), Nakamoto, S. (2008). Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system. https://doi.org/ Neuhaus, J.M., Kalbfleisch, J.D., Hauck, W.W., 1991. A comparison of cluster-specific and population-averaged approaches for analyzing correlated binary data. Int. Stat. Rev. Revue 25–35. https://doi.org/10.2307/1403572. Okorie, D.I., Lin, B., 2020. Crude oil price and cryptocurrencies: evidence of volatility connectedness and hedging strategy. Energy Econ. 87, 104703 https://doi.org/ Pi˜neiro-Chousa, J., L´opez-Cabarcos, M.´A., Caby, J., ˇSevi´c, A., 2021. The influence of investor sentiment on the green bond market. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 162, Qin, K., Zhou, L., Livshits, B., Gervais, A, 2021. Attacking the defi ecosystem with flash loans for fun and profit. In: International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 3–32,-March. Rohr, J., Wright, A., 2019. Blockchain-based token sales, initial coin offerings, and the democratization of public capital markets. Hastings 70 ((2). L.J. 463. Available at: Sch¨ar, F. (2020). Decentralized finance: on blockchain- and smart contract-based financial markets. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3571335 or Symitsi, E., Chalvatzis, K.J., 2019. The economic value of bitcoin: a portfolio analysis of currencies, gold, oil and stocks. Res. Int. Bus. Financ. 48, 97–110. https://doi.org/ Thomas, A., Spataro, L., Mathew, N., 2014. Pension funds and stock market volatility: an empirical analysis of OECD countries. J. Financ. Stab. 11, 92–103. https://doi.org/ Wulf, A.K., 2020. Digital asset market evolution. J. Corp. Law. Legal Studies Research Paper No. 20-02. Available at SSRN. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3606663. Yin, L., Nie, J., Han, L., 2021. Understanding cryptocurrency volatility: the role of oil market shocks. Int. Rev. Econ. Financ. 72, 233–253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. J. Pi˜neiro-Chousa et al.

Technological Forecasting & Social Change 181 (2022) 121740 Zelner, B.A., 2009. Using simulation to interpret results from logit, probit, and other nonlinear models. Strateg. Manag. J. 30 (12), 1335–1348. https://doi.org/10.1002/ Zhang, W., Wang, P., Li, X., Shen, D., 2018. The inefficiency of cryptocurrency and its cross-correlation with Dow Jones industrial average. Physica A 510, 658–670. Whaley, R. (2000) The investor fear gauge. J. Portfolio Manag., 26 (3), 2000, 12-17. Juan Pi˜neiro-Chousa is a professor of finance at Santiago de Compostela University (USC), Spain. He has written many articles and papers in national and international journals and has made important contributions to prestigious international conferences.His-research interests focus on financial strategy, corporate finance, artificial intelligence and corpo­ M. ´Angeles L´opez-Cabarcos is a professor of business administration at Santiago de Compostela University (USC), Spain. She is de Director of the Aula TIC-PYMEs and she coordinates the M´aster of Business Administration at USC. As a researcher, she has written many articles and papers in prestigious national and international journals. She has written books and made contributions to international conferences. She has also carried out several technical assistances with important organizations belonging to private sector. Aleksandar ˇSevi´c is a Lecturer at Trinity Business School – Dublin since September 2008 and Director of the MSc in Finance Programme since June 2010. Previously, he held an academic position at the University of Newcastle, NSW, Australia and was a Research Officer at the Economics Institute in Belgrade, a leading Serbian economics research institution and consultancy house. His-research is focused on International Finance, Corporate Governance and Cryptocurrencies. Isaac Gonz´alez-L´opez is rearcher at Santiago de Compostela University (USC), Spain. His- research interests focus on Initial Coin Offerings, Blockchain technology and decentralized J. Pi˜neiro-Chousa et al.

---NEW PAPER---

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 Available online 9 June 2022 0275-5319/© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. An intra-cryptocurrency analysis of volatility connectedness and its determinants: Evidence from mining coins, non-mining coins Lanouar Charfeddine a, Noureddine Benlagha a,*, Karim Ben Khediri b a Department of Finance and Economics, College of Business and Economics, Qatar University, P.O. Box 2713, Doha, Qatar b University of Carthage, FSEGN, University of Tunis El Manar, International Finance Group Tunisia and CEROS, University Paris Nanterre, France A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T This paper analysis the dynamic of the volatility connectedness between three main categories of the cryptocurrency market (mineable coins, non-mineable coins and tokens).1 Furthermore, it investigates factors (internal and external) that can help to predict the net directional and total volatility connectedness indices. We find that the CC market is highly connected where mining coins dominate the CC market and are typically net transmitter of shocks. For the non-mining coins, a low connectedness with all mining coins and tokens versus a high connectedness with Stellar are highlighted. The results show also that, unlike previous studies, Ethereum is the dominant contributor to volatility spillover and the only CC net pairwise transmitter in our sample. Interestingly, we find that most of the tokens are highly connected with their platform (Ethereum) rather than bitcoin. Finally, we find that both financial and macroeconomic in­ dicators play an important role in explaining the total and net directional connectedness, a result that can significantly help cryptocurrency market participants and investors improve their risk management and the benefits from diversification. Over the last few years, CCs2 have attracted the interest of several types of market participants including miners, investors, portfolio managers, academic researchers and policy makers. The specific features and characteristic of CCs such as their high returns and high time varying volatilities are the main motives behind this (Corbet et al., 2020; Yousaf and Ali, 2021; Mariana et al., 2021; Maouchi et al., 2021; Montasser et al., 2021). In fact, beyond the high level of returns that can offer CCs, investors have been also interested by E-mail addresses: lcharfeddine@qu.edu.qa (L. Charfeddine), nbenlagha@qu.edu.qa (N. Benlagha), karim.benkhediri@fsegn.ucar.tn 1 The list four mining coins considered in this study contains Bitcoin (BTC), Ethereum (ETH), Litecoin (LTC) and DASH (DASH), the four non- mining coins are Ripple (XRP), EOS (EOS), Binance coin (BNB), and Stellar (XLM)), and the list of four tokens includes Maker (MKR), Basic Attention (BAT), Chainlink (LINK), Augur (REP)). 2 The cryptocurrency market has witnessed a real boom in terms of the number of cryptocurrencies (CCs), number of CCs wallets and market capitalization. For instance, starting with Bitcoin as the only cryptocurrency in 2009, the total number of CCs has surpassed 17 277 by February 2022. Moreover, according to blockchain.com website, the number of CCs wallets has increased from 2 wallets in November 29, 2011 to 81 million wallets in February 2022. Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Research in International Business and Finance Received 25 August 2021; Received in revised form 29 May 2022; Accepted 31 May 2022

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 the financial opportunities that can generate these new types of assets (digital assets) such as financial diversification and hedging strategies (Corbet et al., 2018, 2020; Charfeddine et al., 2020; Yousaf and Ali, 2021; Mariana et al., 2021; Maouchi et al., 2021). Empirically, while the number of research studies investigating the financial aspects (stylized facts, intra- and inter-dependence, and financial diversification) has exploded only recently that academic researchers have been interested to explore the level of financial connectedness involving CCs (Yi et al., 2018; Koutmos, 2018; Ji et al., 2019a). This paper try to contribute to this gap in the digital financial literature by investigating the dynamic features of connectedness between different categories of CCs. Moreover, it examines both internal and external factors that can help to predict the total and net directional connectedness indices. An important motivation of this study is the absence of a common classification of different types of CCs. For instance, according to Hardle et al. (2020), cryptocurrencies may be grouped into seven broad classes. The first class, originally designed as a transaction mechanism, which include for example Bitcoin and Litecoin. Ethereum, Tezos, EOS, and DFinity fall into the second class known as a distributed computation token. The third class of cryptocurrency is called a utility token, which is a programmable blockchain asset (for example, Golem, Storj, Sia and FileCoin). The fourth class of cryptocurrency is a security token. The fifth class is called fungible tokens (for example, ERC-20). A nonfungible token is the sixth classification. In this case, each token is unique and not interchangeable with another (For example, Cryptokitties and Decentraland (LAND). The final class of crypto­ currencies is called stablecoins (For example, tether (USDT), Circle’s USDC, LBXPeg). In this paper, we adopt a more general classification approach as we categorize all cryptocurrnecies into two main categories namely: (1) coins, and (2) tokens. In addition, we divide the coin category into two sub-categories namely mining coins (such as Bitcoin (BTC), Ethereum (ETH), DASH (DASH), Litecoin (LTC)) and the non-mining coins (such as Ripple (XRP), Binance Coin (BNB), EOS (EOS), Stellar (XLM)). Regarding the tokens category and compared to coins, the interest in this second category can be explained by the fact that they have been only recently emerged. The well known and most traded tokens include: Maker (MKR), Basic Attention (BAT), Chainlink (LINK), and Augur (REP). Despite that all the CCs (coins and tokens) share some important common features such as the blockchain technology, there exist also some other important characteristics that can distinguish coins from tokens and vis-versa. For instance, coins are primary designed for purpose of decentralized peer-to-peer payments.3 The main differences between the mineable and non-mineable coins is that contrary to the non-mining coins where the supply of coins is managed by the company offering these coins, the supply for the case of mining coins is endogenously determined by the mining process. The mining process is the process where the miners (individuals or companies) are rewarded when they validate the mining coin transaction. Yet, the tokens are a new form of crowdfunding that offer tokens to investors with the only potential gain is the increase in the price of tokens. Token offerings are smart contracts programmed on distributed ledger technology (Momtaz, 2020). Furthermore, tokens are applications built upon existing blockchains, whereas coins are created on their own blockchain (Momtaz, 2019). For further information on the market evolution, offering mechanisms, and token Garman & Klass Volatility 3 The main advantages of coins as instruments of payments are their ability to ensure anonymity, fast speed of transactions via the peer-to-peer transactions system, and lower costs compared to traditional payment system, e.g. fiat currency. L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 types, see the paper by Momtaz (2019). This study has two main objectives. First, it analyzes the intra-cryptocurrency market volatility spillovers. Second, it investigates whether macroeconomic and financial indicators can help in predicting the dynamic behavior of the net directional and total volatility connectedness indices. Several reasons motivate the focus on this research question. Firstly, while there have been a plenty of studies that have tried to explore the level of connectedness between the CCs and traditional financial assets (Corbet et al., 2018; Koutmos, 2018; Yi et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2019a; Billah et al., 2022), only few have analyzed the connectedness between different type of CCs. Secondly, the recent rapid gaining of interest of non-mining coins and tokens in the last two years has question the dominance and influential position of the mining coins in term of net transmitter/receiver volatility spillover. Thirdly, the recent emergence of a large set of tokens (such as DeFi, decentralized finance) offer some new other potential benefits for markets participants but open new questions, including whether Ethereum, as blockchain platform for almost all the tokens4 will be the more influential in terms of net transmitter/ receiver spillover. Finally, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that attempts to fill these gaps by exploring the relationship and volatility connectedness between different CCs types (coins versus tokens, and mining versus non-mining for coins). Our study classify the different CCs based on their principal characteristics of coins versus tokens, and of mining versus non-mining for the coins. In addition, we explore whether the tokens platforms influence their volatility connectedness. A further motivation is the lack of studies that have investigated the common factors that can explain the dynamic spillovers between different digital assets. Thus, in addition to the evaluation of the spillovers between the considered cryptocurrencies, this study aims to identify factors (internal to CC market, macroeconomic, financial of the dynamic connectedness cryptocurrencies. We first investigate the determinants of total connectedness. Then, we extend our analysis by investigating the factors affecting the net connectedness for each single cryptocurrency. In this paper, we report several key findings. First, mining coins dominate the CC market and are typically net transmitter of shocks while the tokens are mostly followers. Secondly, the non-mining coins exhibit a low connectedness with all mining coins and tokens versus a high connectedness with Stellar are highlighted. Further, unlike previous studies, we found that Ethereum is the dominant contributor to volatility spillover and the only CC net pairwise transmitter in our sample. More interestingly, our findings reveal that most of the tokens are highly connected with their platform (Ethereum) rather than bitcoin. Finally, the findings of our paper indicate that several financial and macroeconomic factors significantly contribute in the dynamics the total and net directional connectedness. The rest of the paper is organized as follow. Section 2 briefly reviews the relevant literature. Section 3 introduces the materials and methods. Section 4 presents and discusses the results and finally Section 5 concludes. In the last few years, a large number of studies in the finance literature has been devoted to studying financial connectedness (returns and volatility) among various assets types. The main motives is their important implications on portfolios performance (Diebold and Yilmaz, 2012, 2014). Recently, a special attention has been attributed to studying connectedness involving digital financial assets. The growing interest on digital financial assets was mainly due to the high financial returns of this new class of financial assets and the financial opportunities that can offer for investors and market participants in terms of hedging and portfolios diversification (Akhtaruzzaman et al., 2019; Bouri et al., 2017; Guesmi et al., 2019; Platanakis and Urquhart, 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Charfeddine et al., 2020). The overall connectedness literature involving digital financial assets can be regrouped into two strands of literature: (1) connectedness between traditional financial assets and digital assets; and (2) connectedness involving only digital financial assets. The first strand of literature concerns studies investigating how Bitcoin is correlated with traditional financial assets and alternative in­ vestments, global and emerging equity (Kajtazi and Moro, 2019), stock market indices (Benlagha, 2020; Benlagha and El Omari, 2022; Gil-Alana et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2019), implied volatility of financial markets (Akyildirim et al., 2019), industry sectors and bond index (Akhtaruzzaman et al., 2019; Benlagha and Hemrit, 2022), a variety of other financial assets, including stocks, fixed income assets, energy and precious metals (Benlagha and Mseddi, 2019; Charfeddine et al., 2020; Corbet et al., 2018; Okorie and Lin, 2020). Note that most of these studies have focused on a single cryptocurrency market, notably the Bitcoin market as it is the most matured and liquid crypto market. In fact, academic researchers have focused much more on the Bitcoin than on others CCs, although the gap Another strand in the connectedness literature that emerged more recently has focused on the cross-cryptocurrency markets (Koutmos, 2018; Yi et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2019a; Balli et al., 2019). Katsiampa (2019a) provides evidence that time-varying conditional correlations exist between Ether and Bitcoin. This study is extended by Katsiampa (2019b) to include other CCs such as Ripple, Litecoin, and Stellar. Findings show that conditional correlations between different pairs of CCs are dynamic. Another closely related paper is Aslanidis et al. (2019) who document that conditional correlations among CCs (Bitcoin, DASH, Monero, and Ripple) are positive and varying across time. Katsiampa et al. (2019b) identify bi-directional volatility spillover effects between all the three pairs of Bitcoin, Ether and Litecoin and show existence of time-varying conditional correlations with positive correlations mostly prevailing. These findings are corroborated by the results of Katsiampa et al. (2019a) using intra-day data for eight CCs. In the same vein, Canh et al. (2019) find that volatility spillovers exist with strong positive correlations among seven largest CCs? examine the volatility spillover between Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Litecoin using the VAR-AGARCH model. They find that the conditional correlations between 4 Approximately 90% of the 1450 tokens traded based on coinmarketcap.com use the Ethereum Platform. Among the top 100 tokens only 9 tokens L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 all pairs of cryptocurrencies are observed to be higher during the COVID-19 period compared to the pre-COVID-19 period. Relying on Diebold and Yilmaz (2014) framework of variance decomposition, another set of studies investigating the connect­ edness of CCs document higher interdependencies between CCs, suggesting that CCs are becoming more integrated. For instance, Koutmos (2018) provides evidence that Bitcoin is the most influential regarding to volatility spillovers in the CC market. Further, results indicate that the intensity of these spillovers has risen steadily over time, due to a higher level of market uncertainty. Relatedly, Yi et al. (2018) find that the level of connectedness among CCs is high and fluctuate cyclically. Their results also reveal that CCs with big capitalizations are more probable to propagate volatility shocks to others. Similarly, Balli et al. (2019) find that the magnitude of short-term connectedness among CCs is much higher than medium and long term, and this connectedness is negatively related to economic uncertainty. Same results are found by Ciaian et al. (2018) applying the ARDL model to examine interdependencies between Bitcoin and Altcoin markets: the relationship is more pronounced in the short-run. Interestingly, Ji et al. (2019a) examine connect­ edness across six large CCs, by employing the approach of Diebold and Yilmaz (2012, 2015). They find that Bitcoin is the dominant contributor of volatility spillovers, followed by Litecoin. More recently, Antonakakis et al. (2019) find that Ethereum is the number one net transmitting cryptocurrency, followed by Bitcoin. They also show that the degree of connectedness is positively associated with Borri (2019) finds,by estimating the conditional tail-risk, that Bitcoin, Ether, Ripple and Litecoin are highly correlated. In a somewhat similar vein, Xu et al. (2020) obtain similar results for 23 CCs, and also find that the total connectedness increases steadily over time. Their results further reveal that Ethereum is the largest systemic risk emitter, while Bitcoin is the largest systemic risk receiver. In the same line, Tiwari et al. (2020) examine the dependence and contagion risk between Bitcoin, Litecoin and Ripple. Their results provide evidence of significant risk contagion among price returns of major CCs, both in bear and bull markets. On the contrary, Zieba et al (2019) find that variations in the price of Bitcoin do not affect and are not affected by variations in prices of other CCs. Using the multifractal analysis to investigate the herding biases, Mnif et al. (2020) quantify the self-similarity intensity of cryptocurrency (Bitcoin, Ethereum, Ripple, Litecoin and Binance) returns’ during the COVID-19 pandemic and report evidence that COVID-19 has a positive impact on the cryptocurrency market efficiency. In a similar vein, Vidal-Tomas (2021) uses a network approach to identify the transitions of the cryptocurrency market over time, and observes that COVID-19 significantly affected cryptocurrencies during a short period of financial panic, giving rise to a remarkable increase of market synchronization for Bitcoin, Ethereum, Ripple and Litecoin. All in all, the broad picture emerging from this literature is that CCs are highly correlated, and the total connectedness increases steadily over time, suggesting that market integration is a continuing and persistent phenomenon. Furthermore, although much effort has been devoted to examining the cross-correlations between CCs, little attention has been paid to the volatility connectedness or spillover effects among different type of CCs. Thus, our study using the spillover index approach to analyze the volatility connectedness across mining coins, non-mining coins and tokens will fill this gap. 3. Materials and methods To analyze the volatility connectedness between the twelve most traded cryptocurrencies reflecting the three categories of mining coins, non-mining coins and the tokens, we propose to use the Diebold and Yilmaz (2014, 2015) framework. Our choice of the Diebold and Yilmaz (2014, 2015) approach is mainly motivated by its several advantages when compared to other approaches (Otranto, 2015). For instance, beyond fulfilling our main goal of assessing the connectedness levels and directions among the digital assets under investigation, this approach allows the investigation of bilateral connectedness as well as displaying the strength and the dynamic of volatility connectedness. Furthermore, the method allows accurate comparisons among alternative model structures and variable sets. More importantly, compared with concurrent correlation-based methods such as the Wavelet analysis and the multivariate GARCH models, Costa et al. (2021) suggest that Diebold and Yilmaz (2012) methodology is advantageous as it enables inferring direction of spillovers for a wide number of simultaneously interacting variables in a clear and compact way. However, the major shortcoming of the method is that the estimated results might be influenced by the chosen window size. To overcome this limitation, the order of the estimated VAR should be well specified. Furthermore, a robustness check methodology should be appropriately conducted. In this section, we will follow and use the same notations for the connectedness measures as in the original paper of Diebold and Yilmaz The starting point of Diebold and Yilmaz (2012, 2014) analysis is to consider an N-dimensional vector (y1, y2, ..., yN) modeled by a covariance stationary vector autoregression VAR(p) model as, with ϵt ~ N(0, Σϵ) is a vector of an i. i. d, p is the order of the VAR model which is determined based on the information criteria and Φi for i = 1, 2, . . . p is the matrix of the model coefficients. The moving average representation of Eq. (1) is given by, where the N × N coefficients of the Ai matrices follow the recursion Ai = ∑p j=1ΦiAi−j, with A0 = IN and Ai = 0 for i < 0. The moving average representation is a key of the dynamic of the system under investigation since it allows the calculation of the variance de­ compositions. This variance decomposition splits the H – step-ahead forecast error variances of each variable of the model into L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 different parts attributable to the various system shocks. Diebold and Yilmaz (2012, 2014) propose to use the generalized variance decomposition (GVD) approach developed by Koop et al. (1996) and Pesaran and Shin (1998). The use of the GVD approach is mainly motivated by its ability to overcome the problem of variables ordering (Koop et al., 1996 and Pesaran and Shin, 1998).Following Diebold and Yilmaz (2014, 2015) the j’s contribution to variable i’s H – step-ahead generalized forecast error variance decomposition here σjj is the standard deviation of the error term for the jth equation. Σϵ represents the error vector, ϵ, covariance matrix. ej is the selected vector which has 1 at the jth element and zeros elsewhere. Ah are the coefficients as defined in the moving average repre­ sentation.Finally, to facilitate interpretation and comparability, each entry of of the GVD matrix is normalized by the row sum. Explicitly,the normalized entries are given by, As a consequence of this normalization, ∑N ij = 1 and ∑N Diebold and Yilmaz (2012, 2014) propose several measures of volatility connectedness that we group into three main categories based on the type of connectedness (single, total and grand total): (1) own, pairwise and net pairwise directional connectedness, (2) total directional connectedness “from" and “to", (3) net total directional connectedness, and finally (4) the total connectedness index. These four measures of connectedness are summarized in the table below: 3.1.1. Own, pairwise and net pairwise directional connectedness The upper-left block of Table 1 reports both the own-connectedness (diagonal entries) and the pairwises directional connectedness from cryptocurrency i to j and from j to i (off-diagonal entries). To calculate the net pairwise directional connectedness, one can just calculate the difference between the two paiwrise directional connectedness. These four individuals connectedness are defined as • The own-connectedness is defined by CH • The pairwise directional connectedness from j to i is defined by CH • The pairwise directional connectendess from i to j is defined by CH • The net pairwise directional connectendess from cryptocurrency i to currency j is defined as CH 3.1.2. Total directional connectedness “from others", “to others" and the net The two total directional connectedness “from others" and “to others" are also known as the total directional connectedness “received" and “transmitted", respectively. The total directional connectedness are defined as the share of the H-step forecast error variance of one variable coming from shocks arising in all the other variables. As shown in Table 1, there are 2N total directional connectedness, an N total directional connectedness “received" and N total directional connectedness “transmitted". As for the own and pairwise directional connectedness, the net total directional connectedness is calculated as the difference between the two “from others" and “to others" total directional connectedness. These three total directional connectedness can be defined as, • Total connectedness “from others" is defined by CH ij ,j ∕= i. • Total connectedness “to others" is defined by CH ij ,i ∕= j. • Total net connectedness is defined as CH 3.1.3. Total connectedness index (TCI) The total connectedness index is the grand total of the off-diagonal entries of the upper-left block of Table 1. This total connect­ edness measure is viewed as a systemic risk measure (Diebold and Yilmaz, 2012, 2014). Analytically, it is defined by, • TCI = CH ij ∕N,i ∕= j. L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 Two measures of market volatility will be used in this study: (1) the Garman and Klass (1980) measure and (2) the Parkinson (1980) measure. While, the results of the first measure will be discussed in details in the paper, the results for the second measure will be only presented as for robustness checking.5 The Garman and Klass (1980) measure is defined by, GKt = 0.511(Ht −Lt)2 −0.019[(Ct −Ot)(Ht + Lt −2Ot) −2(Ht −Ot)(Lt −Ot)] −0.383(Ct −Ot)2 where H, L, O, and C denote the high, low, opening and closing prices at day t, respectively. 4. Results and discussion 4.1. Data and variable description Daily high, low, opening and closing prices are used to calculate the Garman and Klass (1980) and Parkinson (1980) volatility series for the twelve considered cryptocurrencies. All the data was retrieved from https://coinmarketcap.com. Among the thousands of cryptocurrencies available for trading, we focus our analysis on the top CCs in terms of market capitalization and data availability. Precisely, the list of selected cryptocurrencies was subject to two major criteria: (1) we restrict our analysis on the top four mining coins and top four non-mining coins, and top four tokens in terms of market capitalization, and (2) the sample period used should include the last recent period of cryptocurrencies prices boom and bust (end of 2017 and beginning 2018). Moreover, for reason of data avail­ ability for the four tokens, we have been restricted to focus our analysis on the period from October 28th, 2017 to April 5th, 2020, which give us a total number of observations of T = 891. The final list of twelve CCs include: (1) the top four mining coins namely Bitcoin (BTC), Ethereum (ETH), Litecoin (LTC) and DASH (DASH), (2) the top four non-mining coins which includes Ripple (XRP), EOS (EOS), Binance coin (BNB), and Stellar (XLM)), and (3) finally the list of the top four tokens that includes Maker (MKR), Basic Attention (BAT), Chainlink (LINK), Augur (REP) (Hardle et al., 2020; Maouchi et al., 2021; Montasser et al., 2021). In terms of market capitalization, the twelve CC considered in this study account for more than 81% of the whole CC market as of April 5th, 2020. In our sample, the market value of the mining coins is $145.13b US, which exceeds the 90.9% of the whole market value of the twelve CCs. The non-mining coins and the tokens market values are $13.07b and $1.41b, which represent approximately 8.1% and approximately 1% of the total market value of the twelve CCs, respectively. This clearly shows the dominance of the cryptocurrency market by the mining coins where the sole Bitcoin market share exceeds the 64.4% of the total CC market (more than 5400 cryptocurrencies by the end of April 5th, 2020). Table 2 lists some other important characteristics of the twelve cryptocurrencies. The most attractive feature is the high variability of CC prices. An analysis by category shows that during our period of analysis, the prices of the mining coins have been multiplied by 285 times for Bitcoin and 5002 times for DASH. For non-mining coins prices have been multiplied between 44 times for EOS and 1127 times for Ripple. Finally, for tokens, prices have been multiplied by 10 times for ChainLink and 74 times for Maker. In terms of ranking, seven out of the twelve cryptocurrencies are ranked among the top 10 crypto-market. Only the four tokens are ranked above the top 20 Fig. 1 displays the volatility series by CCs category (mining coins, non-mining coins and tokens). We remark that all the three sub- figures reported in Fig. 1 show presence of extremes in the daily volatilities of most of the studied cryptocurrencies. For instance, the high volatility observed in 2017 is mainly due to the announcement of the US regulatory to reject the Bitcoin ETF in February 2017. In addition, targeting the Ethereum platform by cyber-attack in September 2017 led to a sharp increase in the volatility of most of the digital assets. However, the rapid increase in the BTC price notably between August ($2797) and December ($19 050), which cor­ responds to a rise in BCT price of approximately 600%, coincides with the Tweets by John McAfee in November 2017 that Bitcoin will reach $1 million by 2020. On the contrary, the value of BTC shows a decreasing trend between January and December 2018. We can offer possible explanations behind the sharp drop in prices from $ 10 823 to $3429. During this year, two major events took place in the Connectedness table (Diebold and Yilmaz, 2014). ij ,i ∕= j Notes: CTO, CIO, and NC refer to the connectedness to others, connectedness including own, and total net connectedness. 5 See the supplementary document for further discussion of the results of the Parkinson (1980) volatility measure. L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 Bitcoin market. First, at the beginning of the year, UBS Chairman Axel Weber and Warren Buffet, CEO of Berkshire Hathaway, warns investors to steer clear of Bitcoin and cryptocurrencies in general. Second, in February, the Chinese government states its intent to ban foreign cryptocurrency exchange platforms in addition to domestic exchanges. Another range of extreme volatility is observed by the end of 2020. Indeed, in that particular period, the Bitcoin was trading at record highs reaching $30 000 and most of the crypto­ currencies behaved similarly. This performance led financial analysts and investors to claim that Bitcoin is a “digital gold" and a store We report also basic descriptive statistics in Table 3. Several interesting facts emerge from this Table. First, the within day volatility is the lowest for the mining coins and the highest for the tokens. Second, the level of volatility is very high during the period of mid- November 2017, mid-February 2018 and mid-March 2020. Finally, the volatility is persistent according to the estimated fractional long memory parameter (Gaussian semi-parametric estimator of Robinson (1995)). In addition, we report the correlation matrix along with the scatter diagram in Fig. 2 for the GK volatility measure. These figures provide a useful preliminary indication about the degree of correlation between the different CCs volatility. Overall, we observe that the correlation is highly significant, e.g. at 1% level of significance, independently from the CC category. In particular, we found that Ethereum has the highest correlations with all the other CCs coins and tokens. Fig. 2 also shows that the intra-mining coins correlations are the highest compared to the intra-non-mining and intra-tokens correlations. In addition, as expected, we observe that the inter- correlation between mining coins and the two others categories are the highest compared to the correlation between non-mining Keys figures about the CC as of April 5th, 2020. First day of trading Notes: CS Share refers to the share of the circulating supply on the max supply. (-) refers to no data for maximum supply. Fig. 1. Daily mining coins, non-mining coins and tokens volatilities using the GK measure. Volatility summary statistics for coins and tokens. Notes: GSP refers to the Gaussian semi-parametric estimator of the fractional long memory parameter as developed by Robinson (1995). The ARCH (12) follows an F(12 866) distribution under the null hypothesis. L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 coins and tokens. Finally, among the tokens, we find that Maker has the lowest correlation and that BAT has the highest correlation In the next section, we analyze the market volatility connectedness between the three cryptocurrency categories (intra-crypto­ currency). We start our analysis by discussing the results of the static connectedness based on the different connectedness measures presented in Section 3.1. Then, in the second step, we deeper the analysis by investigating the dynamic connectedness using the rolling window approach. Finally, in the last step, we explore and examine the possible determinants of both the net and total connectedness. 4.2.1. Own, pairwise and net pairwise directional connectedness To assess how volatility shocks are transmitted across cryptocurrencies, we begin our analysis by focusing on the “individual" connectedness measures. The results matrix of static connectedness for the twelve CCs are reported in Table 4 for the GK volatility measure. Several important features can be drawn from the table. First, the results show that the own connectedness elements are the largest individual elements of the table. On average, tokens possess the largest own connectedness, followed by non-mining coins and finally mining coins. Precisely, the results show that the own-effects (own share) for the mining coins range between 19.58% for Ethereum and 27.08% for the DASH coin. For the non-mining coins, the own-effects range between 26.42% for EOS and 36.38% for XRP (Ripple). Finally, for the tokens, the own-connectednesse range between 40.44% for LINK and 56.77% for MKR coin to 81.08% for the BAT coin. Comparing our results of own-effects to some recent published articles, we find that the own connectedness is much lower than Ji et al. (2019a) who find values of own connectedness raging from 46.7% for Litecoin to 97.1% for DASH for their 07/08/2015 - 22/02/2018 sample and range between 37% to 60.8% for the 01/01/2017- 22/02/2018 subsample. There are several possible explanations for this high difference in results: (1) the cryptocurrency market becomes more integrated over time inducing an Fig. 2. This figure reports on top the (absolute) value of the correlation and the result of the correlation test is given by stars. On bottom, the bivariate scatterplots, with a fitted line. L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 increase in the spillover of shocks in the cryptocurrency market (a similar result is observed by Yi et al. (2018)) (2) the level of the own connectedness is negatively correlated with the number of cryptocurrency and the data period considered in the sample. However, when comparing the own connectedness of the mining coin block to the own connectedness of studies focusing on conventional financial market, we find evidence for strong similarity in the level of the own-effects (see for instance Diebold and Yilmaz (2014, The second important feature observed in Table 4 concerns the pairwise directional connectedness, CH i←j, that are presented by the off-diagonal elements of the upper-left 13 submatrix. The results show that the bilateral connectedness is larger between the mineable submarket coins, followed by the pairwise bilateral connectedness between mining and non-mining coins, and finally between non- mineable and token. The largest observed individual connectedness is from Ethereum to Bitcoin (CH BTC←ETH = 13.81). The second observed largest pairwise directional connectedness is from Ethereum to Bitcoin, (CH LTC←ETH = 13.02). We find also that the third and fourth largest pairwise directional connectedness involve Ethereum as transmitter, (CH EOS←ETH = 12.85) and (CH DASH←ETH = 12.22). The results also show that Ethereum is the only net transmitter to Bitcoin. However, on the other hand, we find that Augur has the lowest pairwises directional connectedness with LINK, XRP, and BTC, (CH LINK←REP = 1.17, CH XRP←REP = 1.38, and CH BTC←REP = 1.66). An inter­ esting result emerges when analyzing the pairwise connectedness between the tokens and their platform compared to their connectedness with Bitcoin. We find that for three tokens (Maker, BAT and REP) out of four cases, Ethereum has the largest values of volatility transmission. These results can be explained by the fact that all these tokens have Ethereum as a platform. The results of the two pairwise directional connectedness (the upper and lower off-diagonal connectedness table) can be used to calculate the individual connectedness known as the net pairwise directional connectedness. The results show that, in net terms, the directional connectedness take place from Ethereum to the eleven other cryptocurrencies, from Bitcoin to 10 cryptocurrencies (with Ethereum the exception), from Litecoin to 9 cryptocurrency (with Ethereum and Bitcoin as exceptions), and from EOS to 8 crypto­ currencies (except BTC, ETH and LTC). For the four tokens, they are almost net individual receivers. However, for the DASH and the three non-mining coins (XRP, XLM, and BNB), their net pairwise directional connectedness is almost negative with the mining sub­ market coin and positive with the token submarket. In nutshell, the results of the off-diagonal pairwise directional connectedness show that BTC, Ethereum, LTC and EOS are almost net pairwise directional transmitter, that all the four tokens are almost net receiver, and that non-mining coins are net transmitter to the tokens but net receiver from mining coins. The results show also that Ethereum and Augur are the net pairwise directional transmitter and the net pairwise directional receiver in the sample, respectively. 4.2.2. Total directional connectedness “from others", “to others" and the net The total directional connectedness “from others" and “to others" are defined as the sum of the row and column pairwise directional connectedness, respectively. The results of the total directional connectedness “from others" and “to others" are reported in the last column and the row TO ("to others") of Table 4, respectively. While the sum of own connectedness with the total directional connectedness “from others" is set to be equal to 100%, the sum of own connectedness with total directional connectedness “to others" is not constrained to be equal to 100%, (e.g. TO = 110.63%). The results show that mining coins are among the top five highest total connectedness “from others". In particular, we found that Ethereum has the largest value of “from others" total connectedess (CH ETH←• = 79.55%) followed by LTC and BTC. The lowest values are obtained by the four tokens with the lowest value is obtained for BAT (CH BAT←• = 18.91%). Concerning the total connectedness “to others" and similar to the results of total connectedness “from others", we found that the four mining coins are among the top five highest total connectedness “from others". Again, we found that Ethereum has the highest value (TO = 110.63%) and that ETH, BTC and LTC are ranked in the top. The results for the four tokens are also similar to the “from others" total connectedness. In particular, we find again that BAT has the lowest value (TO = 5.14%). Full-sample connectedness table using the GK volatility measure. Notes: CTO refers to contribution to others; CIO refers to contribution including own and NS refers to net spillover. L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 Moving to the net total connectedness which is defined by the simple difference between the total connectedness “to others" and “from others". The results are reported in the last row of Table 4. The green color is used to indicate that the correspondning cryp­ tocurrency has a positive net total conncetedness meaning that it is a net transmitter. The red color indicates that the corresponding cryptocurrency has a negative net total connectedness (net receiver). The results show that Ethereum leads the way for the net transmitter cryptocurrencies with a positive total net connectedness of 32.21% (CH ETH←• = 111.76% − 32.21%), followed by Bitcoin (CH BTC = 22.09%), Litecoin (CH LTC = 11.64%), and EOS (CH EOS = 6.78%). For the four tokens, the net total connectedness is found to be negative with the highest in absolute value is found for Augur, followed by Marker, BAT and ChairLink. The net total connectedness for DASH, Ripple, Binance, and Stellar are also negative but weak. Moreover, our results show that the net connectedness of BTC and ETH are higher than that obtained for conventional financial stock markets (Diebold and Yilmaz, 2012, 4.2.3. Total and net connectedness analysis The results show that the total connectedness index of the CC market is equal to 63.03% which is very high compared to some previous studies investigating the only case of cryptocurrency market or the case of mixed financial assets (digital and conventional). For instance, Koutmos (2018) find a TCI of 20% despite the use of 18 cryprocurrencies which expected to increase the level of TCI (see Diebold and Yilmaz (2014)). Also, Ji et al. (2019a) find also a smaller value of TCI=32.9%. Comparing our TCI to the sutdy of Corbet et al. (2018) who find a TCI of 38%, our TCI is still higher while the results are well expected since the examined sample is a mixed sample that include both cryptocurruencies and conventional assets.6 4.3.1. Total dynamic connectedness As noted by several studies, the static analysis reported in Section 4 is based on one single point estimate of connectedness measures, then it cannot be used for a time-varying analysis of the connectedness between different financial assets (Diebold and Yilmaz, 2014, 2015). In our context, the static analysis will be unable to provide specific analysis on how the several and important internal and external shocks that have affected the crytopcurrency market7 will affect the different measures of connectedness. Consequently, for a better understanding of the dynamic connectedness, we use a rolling sample approach (dynamic connectedness) with 200-days rolling-sample windows and 10-day-ahead forecast to estimate the time series of all the connectedness measures described in Section 3.1. To save space and similar to most previous studies, we focus our analysis on the results of the total connectedness indices, the net pairwise directional connectedness, the pairwise directional connectedness “to others", and the pairwise directional connectedness “from others", plotted in Figs. 3, 6, 4, and 5, respectively. Fig. 3 reports the total connectedness measure when using the GK volatility measure for the whole sample (12 cryptocurrencies), for the mining coins, the non-mining-coins and the tokens. The results show that the total connectedness index os awfully volatile and is evolving overtime. It varies between 43% (reached in October 20th 2018) and 88% (reached in March 08th 2018 and March 15–20th 2020). Fig. 3 shows also that between the end of October 2018 and March 2020, the index show an increasing upward trend. By analyzing the total market capitalization of the cryptocurrency market, we note that the latter two dates coincides with some specific important negative events that have marked the cryptocurrency market. The first huge fall in the cryptocurrency market capitalization of March 08th 2018 is viewed as a continuous drop in the cryptocurrency market after the unprecedented bull of end 2017-beginning 2018. The second period of high connectedness index correspond to the recent stock market crash of mid-March 2020. During this period, most of stock markets around the word have largely dropped. In the Black Monday II (March 16), the Asia-Pacific and European stock markets closed down by about 9.7%. In north America, the Dow Jones Industrial Average, the NASDAQ Composite, and the S&P 500 all fell by approximately 13%. In the commodity market, oil prices fell by 10% and the Cboe volatility index closed with the highest ever closing value at 82.69. 4.3.2. Total net, “to others" and “from others" directional dynamic connectedness To go further deep in the analysis of the dynamic directional connectendess, we report in Figs. 4–6 the results of the ranking of the directional dynamic connectedness “to others" and “from others" using the heatmap tool, and the total net dynamic directional First, we use the heatmap tool to rank the twelve cryptocurrencies based on their directional connectedness “to others" and “from others". The results are reported in Figs. 4 and 5 for the GK volatility measures. The results reported in Figs. 4 and 5 show the ranking which is presented by different colors ranging from blue to red when moving from 0 to 12 values. The results reported in Fig. 4 clearly show that the level of “connectedness to" is the highest for the mining coins, followed by the non-mining coins and tokens. For the 4 tokens, we observe that the level of “connectedness to" is very low (smaller than 2) for almost all the period of study, except for BAT during the first three month and March 2020. The results of the analysis by coin show that bitcoin has the highest values of directional “connectedness to" is observed during the period from November 2018 to mid-May 2019 and then during March 2020 when the level of 6 Previous studies have shown evidence for high intra-cryptocurrencies dependence with their isolation from the conventional market. 7 We refer readers to the following papers that have reported and analyzed the importance of internal and external shocks affecting the cryp­ tocurrency market on portfolio managers, diversification, hedging strategies (?). L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 directional connectedness reaches high maximum. However, for the Ethereum cryptocurrency, the results show that the level of directional “connectedness to" is overall high for the whole period of analysis except December 2018-January 2019. Similar to BTC, we find that the highest value of the level of directional “connectedness to" is found for March 2020. A similar conclusion, regarding March 2020, is observed for all the cryptocurrencies, which can be explained by the effect of the recent COVID-19 pandemic crisis and the effects of the oil prices War between Saudi Arabia and Russia. For the direction “connectedness to others", the results reported in Fig. 5 show that the level of connectedness is overall medium, ranging between 5 and 7.5 except for XRP and BNB during few months. Similar to the directional “connectedness to", we find that, for tokens, the directional “connectdeness to" others is very low and range between 0 and 4 for almost all the period of analysis. Finally, Fig. 6 presents the total net directional dynamic connectendness along with its descriptive statistics (mean, median, Fig. 3. This figure shows the total connectedness for the GK volatility measure. The results are reported for the four markets considered (the whole cryptocurrency market, the mining coins market, the non-mining coins market, and the tokens market) from April 4, 2018 to May 31, 2019 based on rolling windows of 200 days and 10-step ahead forecast predictive horizon. Fig. 4. This figure reports the dynamic ranking of to-connectedness for the twelve cryptocurrencies when using GK volatility measure. The color from blue to red represents an increase of connectedness to from 0 to 12. L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 maximum, minimum, standard deviation, Skewness and kurtosis). Three important conclusions can be drawn from the time varying net directional connectendess analysis. First, we find that it is almost positive for the three mining cryptocurrency Bitcoin, Ethereum and Litecoin. Second, it fluctuates from positive net directional connectedness to negative directional connectedness for six crypto­ currencies (the four mining coins, DASH and Chainlink). Finally, it is almost negative for the rest three tokens (Maker, Basic Attention Token, and Augur). In addition, similar to our static conclusion, we find that only Ethereum and Augur have positive and negative net spillover respectively, during the whole sample period of our analysis. In addition, the descriptive statistics results reported in the same figure show that four out of the twelve cryptocurrency are characterized by a positive mean and that the rest of the eight cryptocurrencies are characterized by a negative mean. However, we find that seven out of the cryptocurrencies have a positive median indicating that the magnitude of the negative values in absolute value are more important than the positive ones. Finally, based on the Skweness and Kurtosis values, the normal distroibution cannot be accepted for ten out of the twelve cryptocurrencies where DASH and Chainlink are the only two exceptions. Fig. 5. This figure reports the dynamic ranking of from-connectedness for the twelve cryptocurrencies when using GK volatility measure. The color from blue to red represents an increase of connectedness to from 0 to 12. Fig. 6. This figure reports the net spillover for each cryptocurrency using the GK measure of volatility. L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 4.4. Determinants of total and net connectedness The analysis of factors explaining the dynamic connectedness between the different studied cryptocurrencies is particularly important for portfolio managers, investors and academic scholars willing to reduce the financial risks and maximizing returns of their portfolio. For this purpose, we first introduce in Section 4.4.1 the linear regression model used to explain the net directional and total connectedness index. Then, in a second subsection, we analyze the obtained results from estimating the different proposed models. For all the estimated models (for net directional and total connectedness index), we use only the trading volumes of the main crypto­ currencies (mining and non-mining coins). The linear regression model proposed to investigate the key factors affecting the net directional and total connectedness index was developed based on the existing literature (Balcilar et al., 2017; Bouri et al., 2017; Ji et al., 2019b). Traditional macroeconomic and financial factors (such as global finance factors and major commodities) in addition to measures of economic and financial uncertainty are considered as the main factors affecting the levels of the connectedness across cryptocurrencies. Then, for each cryptocurrency i, the following linear regression is used to explain the key determinants of the net directional and Connectt = β0 + Where Connectt is either net directional connectedness for the cryptocurrency i or the total connectedness index for the whole twelve considered cryptocurrencies. The explanatory variables are defined as follow: • Volumet: is the trading volume for each of the 8 major studied cryptocurrencies (mining coins and non-mining coins). • GFFt: We use the MSCI World stock index to represent the global financial factor. • EIt: is the energy index represented by the MSCI energy index. • GBIt: is the Gold Bullion index. • VIXt: is the CBOE volatility index. This index replicates the effects of policy uncertainties on the net connectedness of the In this model, the Connectt variables are as estimated in Section 4.3. The variables EIt and GBIt are employed to explore the impacts of major commodities on the two measures of connectedness. The Volumet variables are collected from https://coinmarketcap.com/. Data about MSCI and VIX are retrieved from https://markets.cboe.com/ and from https://www.quandl.com/ for GBI and EI. The determinants of the total connectedness for GK volatility measure. Notes: *** and ** indicate significance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively. L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 4.4.1. Results analysis of determinants of net directional and total connectedness To assess the determinants of the total connectedness, we estimated two models. In the first model, we consider only the trading volumes of the eight cryptocurrencies as explanatory variables. In the second model, we include other additional variables that reflect the global finance policy uncertainties and major commodities factors as cryptocurrency external potential explanatory variables. Table 5 reports the results of the OLS regressions for the total connectedness obtained in Section 4.4.1. The results show that the coefficients associated to the trading volume of all cryptocurrencies are highly significant, e.g. at 1% significance level. Accurately, the coefficients are positive for BTC, ETH, XLM, BNB and EOS and negative for only three cryptocurrencies, namely LTC, DASH and XRP. These results are in accordance with those obtained in Table 4 where BTC, ETH and EOS are found to be net transmitters of volatility to the studied cryptocurrency. The results are confirmed for all the estimated models even after adding the economic and financial factors. Our findings are consistent with Balcilar et al. (2017) and Ji et al. (2019a) regarding the strength of the relationship between the trading volumes and the total connectedness in the cryptocurrency market. The result of the second model, reported in the third column of Table 5, provides additional evidences on the factors explaining the total connectedness in the cryptocurrency market. First, the results reveal a significant positive relationship between the volatility index (VIX) and the total connectedness. This finding in­ dicates that the increase of uncertainty in the US conventional stock market increases the volatility connectedness in the digital assets. For this later result, a possible explanation is that investors tend to switch into the cryptocurrency market to hedge any possible stock market loss inducing a higher total connectedness between several digital assets in periods of high uncertainty in the conventional stock market (see Bouri et al. (2017)). In addition, our results highlight a significant positive impact of the global financial factor proxied by the MSCI. This positive relationship between the total connectedness and the conventional financial market can be explained by the competition that exists between the two types of markets. When investors are expecting to generate profits on the conventional financial markets, the number of transactions and liquidity will diminish on the cryptocurrency market increasing risks in this particular market. Consequently, the growing risk will induce an increase of the total connectedness in the cryptocurrency market. For further analysis of the determinants of the connectedness between mining, non-mining cryptocurrencies and tokens, we proposed to analyze also factors affecting the dynamic net directional connectedness of each studied cryptocurrency using the same economic and financial factors as for the case of total connectedness index. Table 6 provides the results of the OLS regressions for the net connectedness acquired using the Diebold and Yilmaz (2014) approach on the GK′s volatility measure. As regard to trading volumes, the results show that all net connectedness of the mining cryptocurrencies are influenced by their own trading volumes, except for bitcoin. For the non-mining coins, the own trading volumes affect BNB and EOS but not XRP and XLM. In addition, for all the studied tokens we find a significant relationship between the net connectedness and the own trading volumes, except for REP. More interestingly, our findings show that the relationship between the net connectedness and the own trading volumes are negative for the mainstream cryptocurrencies. Consequently, the decline of the own trading volume tends to increase the net connectedness of a particular cryptocurrency with others. In addition, our results show that trading volumes of BTC and ETH significantly affect the net connectedness of almost all the cryptocurrencies, especially tokens. It is important to remind that these two cryptocurrencies, BTC and ETH, are found to be the leading transmitter of volatility spillover in the previous section. Thus, being transmitter of volatility potentially explains the association between the trading volumes and the net connectedness. Further, Ethereum as the platform for several studied cryptocurrencies, especially for tokens, significantly influences the net spillover via its trading volumes. It is also important to note that the magnitude of the effect of mining coins trading volumes is mostly more important on the net spillovers of mining and non-mining coins than that of the net spillovers of tokens. As illustration, the increase of trading volumes of BTC by one-unit increases the net connectedness of ETH (mining) by 2.256 units; however, for the similar variation in BTC’ trading volumes, the net connectedness of MKR (Token) rises only by 0.868 units. Regarding the economic and financial fundamentals variables, the results reveal a significant positive relationship between the volatility index (VIX) and the net connectedness of BTC and all the tokens, except for REP. Accordingly, the increase of uncertainty in the US conventional stock market increases the volatility connectedness for BTC and most of Tokens. However, a negative association is revealed between VIX and the rest of cryptocurrencies. Moreover, the results reveal that VIX negatively influences the net connectedness of the mining and non-mining, except for BTC. Besides, our results highlight a significant positive impact of the global financial factor represented by (MSCI) on the net connectedness of the majority of the studied cryptocurrencies. This positive relationship supports the results ob­ tained in the total connectedness regression. This confirms the hypothesis of the presence of competition between the conventional and digital financial markets. Concerning the energy index, one can think that it is expected to be positively associated with mining cryptocurrencies since the mining process is known to be highly energy consuming process (Corbet et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019)). Yet, our results reject the presence of such association except for Litcoin. However, the results show significant association between the energy index and net connectedness of all tokens but it is mostly negative. Finally, the results reveal some significant relationship between Gold Bullion index and the net connectedness of the cryptocurrencies. Particularly, we find that gold prices have a negatively significant effect on the net connectedness of BTC. This finding is in line with the existing literature (see for instance Dyhrberg (2016), Ji et al. (2019a)). Indeed, bitcoin is qualified as a substitute to gold. Thus, an increase in gold will decrease the demand for BTC leading to a decrease in the net connectedness of the BTC with the other cryptocurrencies. In addition to the results presented above, we implement several variations on our basic analysis, with an eye toward checking robustness by using: (i) a second measure of volatility as defined by Parkinson (1980), (ii) different predictive horizon for the un­ derlying variance decomposition, e.g. h = 5 and h = 15, and (iii) different rolling window width, by considering 100,150, 200, 250 and L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 The determinants of the Net connectedness for GK. Notes: ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 300 window sizes. To save space, we summarize in this subsection the main differences and we refer to Section 1 in the supplementary document for a detailed analysis of the robustness checking of the results. i. The results of using the Parkinson (1980) measure of volatility show that overall, we reach the same conclusion as when using the GK volatility measure. For instance, there is no significant changes in the cryptocurrencies net transmitters and net re­ ceivers. Moreover, the results regarding factors determining the total and net connectedness do not show any changes in the sign and statistical significance of the regression coefficients associated to the trading volumes, and financial and macroeconomic ii. Using the two additional variance decomposition forecast horizons, h = 5 and h = 15, the total connectedness for the entire studied cryptocurrency market are similar to those when using h = 10.8 Interestingly, we find that all the the dates of switch and periods of peaks remained unchanged. On the other hand, by analysing the net directional connectedness of the twelve cryptocurrencies, the results show that there exist no significant changes neither in the values of the net spillovers (positive and negative) nor in the sign. The results also show that the order of cryptocurrencies net transmitter and net receiver have not been changed. iii. Using different rolling Windows, the results show that, except for some few cases, the sign of the net connectedness remain the same whatever the window size used and the volatility proxy considered. Further, the net transmitters and net receiver cryptocurrencies remain almost the same. The few exceptions cases are found for the cryptocurrencies that have a net spillovers that are close to zero which confirm the invariability of the results to changing the window size. Regarding the total connectedness index, the results show that it decreases slightly with the window size. However, we believe that a choice of a rolling window size of 200 seems to be the optimal because it provides a compromise between the possible biases of the results that can occur when using a small window size (100 and 150) and the underestimation/overestimation of connectedness measures due to the use of a large sizes (250 and 300). This paper contributes to the empirical literature on the financial properties of the cryptocurrency market by investigating the dynamic volatility connectedness between twelve important cryptocurrencies. To the best of our knowledge, this is the unique study where the analysis take into consideration the cryptocurrencies class (e.g. the mining coins and the non-mining coins versus tokens). In addition, our analysis examines whether internal factors to the cryptocurrency market, and macroeconomic and financial factors (Oil prices, Gold, MSCI and VIX) can be helpful to predict the time varying behavior of the total volatility connectedness and net pairwise Applying the Diebold and Yilmaz (2012, 2014) connectedness framework on twelve cryptocurrencies over a period of more than 2 years which include the major events of high price fluctuation in the cryptocurrencies market, our findings show evidence for several important new results. First, unlike most of previous studies, we find that the cryptocurrency market is highly inter-connected with an average total connectedness, index over the whole period of study, equal to 66.32%. In particular and as expected, we find that the mining coins dominate the cryptocurrency market, where the mining Ethereum coin dominates all the other coins and tokens. The results show that,in our sample, the Ethereum coin is the only coin that has a positive net pairwise directional spillover (net pairwise transmitter). Precisely, we find that the mining coins are typically net transmitter of shocks except for DASH, and that the non-mining coins and tokens are net receivers except for the case of EOS.The results also show that, for the non-mining coins and tokens, the highest bidirectional connectedness is found between ripple and stellar coins. Second, the results provide some evidence on the important role played by the tokens platforms (for example Ethereum in our case) in influencing the bilateral connectedness levels. Finally, regarding the intra-component analysis of connectedness, the results show that the mining coins sub-market has the highest level of connectedness index, followed by non-mining coins and finally tokens. Moreover, in this study, for a better understanding of the dynamic volatility connectedness and their possible explanations, we proposed in a second step to analyze the determinants of the total and net connectedness indices. Our results reveal that the trading volume of the mining and non-mining coins is a key determinant of the total connectedness spillover index. In particular, the results show that the trading volume of the coins that are found to be net transmitter in the first stage of analysis are positively related to the total connectedness index. In contrast, the trading volume of the LTC, DASH and XRP coins are found to negatively determine the total connectedness index. Regarding the external cryptocurrency market factors, the results show that the volatility index (VIX) increases the level of total connectedness in the cryptocurrency market. A similar positive and significant impact is found for the case of the MSCI Going deeper in the analysis, the results of investigating factors explaining the net connectedness show that in addition to its own trading volume, the net spillover of each cryptocurrency is determined by the trading volumes of Bitcoin and Ethereum. For the financial conventional asset factors, our results reveal that the net spillover of the mining and non-mining coins is negatively affected by the volatility index (VIX) (except BCT) but it positively affects the tokens. Further, we found that the hypothesis of positive as­ sociation between the energy index and mining cryptocurrencies is highly rejected except for LTC. Regarding the gold prices, a sig­ nificant negative impact of gold on the net spillover is found for only few net connectedness series. In particular, a negative relationship is found for the case of BTC. 8 e.g. vary between 66.39% and 66.46% when using GK volatility measure and between 62.91% and 63.05% for the Parkinson measure. L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 The empirical findings in this study have several important implications on the risk management and diversification strategies of both traditional financial and cryptocurrency investors. For instance, the results related to the analysis of volatility connectedness (intra-cryptocurrency analysis) and the results of factors predictions of total and net volatility indices (external factors to the cryp­ tocurrency market) can help market participants to identify the set of cryptocurrencies and the macroeconomic and financial factors to include in their portfolio to better manage the level of risk. In fact, the low level of connectedness between non-mining coins and tokens can be interpreted as evidence for possible opportunity for portfolio diversification for cryptocurrency inverstors (intra-cryptocurrency market). By diversifying their portfolios between different cryptocurrency categories, cryptocurrency investors can reduce the risk of their portfolio while maintaining or improving the level of their portfolios returns. However, an important key observation that portfolio mangers and investors should consider is that mining coins shocks have substantial impact globally, with increased volatility leading to substantial global cryptocurrencies market losses. Hence, more attention should be paid to this market. Dynamically, we note that time-varying connectedness can imply time- varying diversification opportunities (Charfeddine and Benlagha, 2016; Fleming et al., 2001, 2003) On the other hand, the results related to macroeconomic and financial factors predictors of the total and net connectedness indices offer several financial diversification. In fact the results show that in many cases the macroeconomic and financial factors cannot help to explain the evolving behavior of total and net connectedness which can be viewed by financial analyst and financial investors as a mean for risk management improvement. This paper was made possible by NPRP Cluster grant # 11C-1229-170007 from the Qatar National Research Fund (a member of Qatar foundation). The opinions expressed and statements made in this paper are those of the authors and are not intended to represent the positions or opinions of the Qatar Foundation or its members. Appendix A. Supplementary material Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.ribaf.2022.101699. Akhtaruzzaman, M., Sensoy, A., Corbet, S., 2019. The influence of bitcoin on portfolio diversification and design. Financ. Res. Lett. 49, 32–42. https://doi.org/ Akyildirim, E., Corbe, S., Lucey, B., Sensoy, A., Yarovaya, L., 2019. The relationship between implied volatility and cryptocurrency returns. Financ. Res. Lett. 33. Antonakakis, N., Chatziantoniou, I., Gabauer, D., 2019. Cryptocurrency market contagion: market uncertainty, market complexity, and dynamic portfolios. J. Int. Financ. Mark. Inst. Money 61, 37–51. 〈https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:intfin:v:61:y:2019:i:c:p:37-51〉. Aslanidis, N., Bariviera, A.F., Martinez-Ibanez, O., 2019. An analysis of cryptocurrencies conditional cross correlations. Financ. Res. Lett. 31, 130–137. https://doi. Balcilar, M., Cakan, E., Gupta, R., 2017. Does us news impact asian emerging markets? Evidence from nonparametric causality-in-quantiles test. N. Am. J. Econ. Financ. 41, 32–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.najef.2017.03.009. Balli, F., de Bruin, A., Chowdhury, M.I.H., Naeem, M.A., 2019. Connectedness of cryptocurrencies and prevailing uncertainties. Appl. Econ. Lett. 0, 1–7. https://doi. Benlagha, N., 2020. Stock market dependence in crisis periods: Evidence from oil price shocks and the Qatar blockade. Res. Int. Bus. Financ. 54, 101285. https://doi. Benlagha, N., El Omari, S., 2022. Connectedness of stock markets with gold and oil: new evidence from covid-19 pandemic. Financ. Res. Lett. 46, 102373. Benlagha, N., Hemrit, W., 2022. Does economic policy uncertainty matter to explain connectedness within the international sovereign bond yields? J. Econ. Financ. Benlagha, N., Mseddi, S., 2019. Return and volatility spillovers in the presence of structural breaks: evidence from gcc islamic and conventional banks. J. Asset Manag. Billah, M., Karim, S., Naeem, M.A., Vigne, S.A., 2022. Return and volatility spillovers between energy and bric markets: evidence from quantile connectedness. Res. Int. Bus. Financ., 101680 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ribaf.2022.101680. Borri, N., 2019. Conditional tail-risk in cryptocurrency markets. J. Empir. Financ. 50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jempfin.2018.11.002. Bouri, E., Molnar, P., Azzi, G., Roubaud, D., Hagfors, L.I., 2017. On the hedge and safe haven properties of bitcoin: is it really more than a diversifier? Financ. Res. Lett. Canh, N.P., Wongchoti, U., Thanh, S.D., Thong, N.T., 2019. Systematic risk in cryptocurrency market: evidence from dcc-mgarch model. Financ. Res. Lett. 29, 90–100. Charfeddine, L., Benlagha, N., 2016. A time-varying copula approach for modelling dependency: New evidence from commodity and stock markets. J. Multinatl. Financ. Manag. 37–38, 168–189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mulfin.2016.10.003. Charfeddine, L., Benlagha, N., Maouchi, Y., 2020. Investigating the dynamic relationship between cryptocurrencies and conventional assets: implications for financial investors. Econ. Model. 85, 198–217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econmod.2019.05.016. Ciaian, P., Rajcaniova, M., Kancs, A., 2018. Virtual relationships: short- and long-run evidence from bitcoin and altcoin markets. J. Int. Financ. Mark. Inst. Money 52, Corbet, S., Meegan, A., Larkin, C.J., Lucey, B.M., Yarovaya, L., 2017. Exploring the dynamic relationships between cryptocurrencies and other financial assets. SSRN. Corbet, S., Meegan, A., Larkin, C., Lucey, B., Yarovaya, L., 2018. Exploring the dynamic relationships between cryptocurrencies and other financial assets. Econ. Lett. Corbet, S., Hou, Y.G., Hu, Y., Larkin, C., Oxley, L., 2020. Any port in a storm: cryptocurrency safe-havens during the covid-19 pandemic. Econ. Lett. 194, 109377. Costa, A., Matos, P., da Silva, C., 2021. Sectoral connectedness: new evidence from us stock market during covid-19 pandemics. Financ. Res. Lett., 102124 Diebold, F.X., Yilmaz, K., 2012. Better to give than to receive: predictive directional measurement of volatility spillovers. Int. J. Forecast. 28, 57–66. L. Charfeddine et al.

Research in International Business and Finance 62 (2022) 101699 Diebold, F.X., Yilmaz, K., 2014. On the network topology of variance decompositions: measuring the connectedness of financial firms. J. Econ. 182, 119–134. https:// Diebold, F.X., Yilmaz, K., 2015. Trans-atlantic equity volatility connectedness: U.S. and European financial institutions, 2004-2014. J. Financ. Econ. 14, 81–127. Dyhrberg, A.H., 2016. Bitcoin, gold and the dollar - a garch volatility analysis. Financ. Res. Lett. 16, 85–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2015.10.008. Fleming, J., Kirby, C., Ostdiek, B., 2001. The economic value of volatility timing. J. Financ. 56, 329–352. https://doi.org/10.1111/0022-1082.00327. Fleming, J., Kirby, C., Ostdiek, B., 2003. The economic value of volatility timing using “realized" volatility. J. Financ. Econ. 67, 473–509. Garman, M.B., Klass, M.J., 1980. On the estimation of security price volatilities from historical data. J. Bus. 53, 67–78. 〈http://www.jstor.org/stable/2352358〉. Gil-Alana, L.A., Abakah, E.J.A., Rojo, M.F.R., 2020. Cryptocurrencies and stock market indices. Are they related? Res. Int. Bus. Financ. 51, 101063 https://doi.org/ Guesmi, K., Saadi, S., Abid, I., Ftiti, Z., 2019. Portfolio diversification with virtual currency: evidence from bitcoin. Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 63, 431–437. https://doi. H¨ardle, W.K., Harvey, C.R., Reule, R.C., 2020. Understanding cryptocurrencies. J. Financ. Econ. 18, 181–208. Ji, Q., Bouri, E., Lau, C.K.M., Roubaud, D., 2019a. Dynamic connectedness and integration in cryptocurrency markets. Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 63, 257–272. https:// Ji, Q., Bouri, E., Lau, C.K.M., Roubaud, D., 2019b. Dynamic connectedness and integration in cryptocurrency markets. Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 63, 257–272. https:// Kajtazi, A., Moro, A., 2019. The role of bitcoin in well diversified portfolios: a comparative global study. Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 61, 143–157. Katsiampa, P., 2019a. An empirical investigation of volatility dynamics in the cryptocurrency market. Res. Int. Bus. Financ. 50, 322–335. Katsiampa, P., 2019b. Volatility co-movement between bitcoin and ether. Financ. Res. Lett. 30, 221–227. Katsiampa, P., Corbet, S., Lucey, B., 2019a. High frequency volatility co-movements in cryptocurrency markets. J. Int. Financ. Mark. Inst. Money 62, 35–52. Katsiampa, P., Corbet, S., Lucey, B., 2019b. Volatility spillover effects in leading cryptocurrencies: a bekk-mgarch analysis. Financ. Res. Lett. 29, 68–74. Koop, G., Pesaran, M., Potter, S.M., 1996. Impulse response analysis in nonlinear multivariate models. J. Econ. 74, 119–147. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-4076(95) Koutmos, D., 2018. Return and volatility spillovers among cryptocurrencies. Econ. Lett. 173, 122–127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2018.10.004. Li, J., Li, N., Peng, J., Cui, H., Wu, Z., 2019. Energy consumption of cryptocurrency mining: a study of electricity consumption in mining cryptocurrencies. Energy 168, Maouchi, Y., Charfeddine, L., ElMontasser, G., 2021. Understanding digital bubbles amidst the covid-19 pandemic: evidence from defi and nfts. Financ. Res. Lett., Mariana, C.D., Ekaputra, I.A., Husodo, Z.A., 2021. Are bitcoin and ethereum safe-havens for stocks during the covid-19 pandemic? Financ. Res. Lett. 38, 101798. Mnif, E., Jarboui, A., Mouakhar, K., 2020. How the cryptocurrency market has performed during covid 19? A multifractal analysis. Financ. Res. Lett. 36, 101647. Momtaz, P.P., 2019. Token sales and initial coin offerings: introduction. J. Altern. Invest. 21, 7–12. Momtaz, P.P., 2020. Entrepreneurial - finance and moral hazard: evidence from token offerings. J. Bus. Ventur. 0, 0. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Montasser, G.E., Charfeddine, L., Benhamed, A., 2021. Covid-19, cryptocurrencies bubbles and digital market efficiency: sensitivity and similarity analysis. Financ. Res. Lett., 102362 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2021.102362. Okorie, D.I., Lin, B., 2020. Crude oil price and cryptocurrencies: evidence of volatility connectedness and hedging strategy. Energy Econ. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Otranto, E., 2015. Capturing the spillover effect with multiplicative error models. Commun. Stat. Theory Methods 44, 3173–3191. Parkinson, M., 1980. The extreme value method for estimating the variance of the rate of return. J. Bus. 53, 61–65. 〈http://www.jstor.org/stable/2352357〉. Pesaran, H., Shin, Y., 1998. Generalized impulse response analysis in linear multivariate models. Econ. Lett. 58, 17–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-1765(97) Platanakis, E., Urquhart, A., 2019. Should investors include bitcoin in their portfolios? A portfolio theory approach. Br. Account. Rev., 100837 https://doi.org/ Robinson, P.M., 1995. Gaussian semiparametric estimation of long range dependence. Ann. Stat. 23, 1630–1661. 〈http://www.jstor.org/stable/2242539〉. Tiwari, A.K., Adewuyi, A.O., Albulescu, C.T., Wohar, M.E., 2020. Empirical evidence of extreme dependence and contagion risk between main cryptocurrencies. N. Am. J. Econ. Financ. 51, 101083 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.najef.2019.101083. Vidal-Tom´as, D., 2021. Transitions in the cryptocurrency market during the covid-19 pandemic: a network analysis. Financ. Res. Lett., 101981 Wang, P., Zhang, W., Li, X., Shen, D., 2019. Is cryptocurrency a hedge or a safe haven for international indices? A comprehensive and dynamic perspective. Financ. Res. Lett. 31, 1–18. Xu, Q., Zhanga, Y., Zhang, Z., 2020. Tail-risk spillovers in cryptocurrency markets. Financ. Res. Lett. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2020.101453. Yi, S., Xu, Z., Wang, G.-J., 2018. Volatility connectedness in the cryptocurrency market: is bitcoin a dominant cryptocurrency? Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 60, 98–114. Yousaf, I., Ali, S., 2021. Linkages between stock and cryptocurrency markets during the covid-19 outbreak: an intraday analysis. Singap. Econ. Rev. 1–20. Zieba, D., Kokozczynski, R., Katarzna, Sleziewsk, 2019. Shock transmission in the cryptocurrency market. Is bitcoin the most influential? Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 64, L. Charfeddine et al.

---NEW PAPER---

Anatomy of a Stablecoin’s failure: the Terra-Luna case Antonio Briolaa,d, David Vidal-Tom´asa,b,d,∗, Yuanrong Wanga,d, Tomaso Astea,c,d aDepartment of Computer Science, University College London, Gower Street, WC1E 6EA - London, United Kingdom. bDepartment of Economics, Universitat Jaume I, Campus del Riu Sec, 12071 - Castell´on, Spain. cSystemic Risk Centre, London School of Economics, London, United Kingdom. dUCL Centre for Blockchain Technologies, London, United Kingdom. We quantitatively describe the main events that led to the Terra project’s failure in May 2022. We ﬁrst review, in a systematic way, news from heterogeneous social media sources; we discuss the fragility of the Terra project and its vicious dependence on the Anchor protocol. We hence identify the crash’s trigger events, analysing hourly and transaction data for Bitcoin, Luna, and TerraUSD. Finally, using state-of-the-art techniques from network science, we study the evolution of dependency structures for 61 highly capitalised cryptocurrencies during the down-market and we also highlight the absence of herding behaviour analysing cross-sectional absolute deviation of returns. JEL codes: G10 · G11 · G40 Stablecoin · Cryptocurrency · LUNA · UST · Network Science · Herding Email address: d.vidal@ucl.ac.uk (David Vidal-Tom´as ) Preprint submitted to Elsevier arXiv:2207.13914v3 [q-fin.GN] 25 Sep 2022

In one of his public declarations, Terra project’s co-founder, Do Kwon, stated that 95% of the companies entering the crypto market were going to die. Indeed, he further aﬃrmed that there was entertainment in watching companies die (Quiroz-Gutierrez, 2022). About a week after this statement, TerraUSD (UST), the stablecoin that, according to its founders, should have been the new peer-to-peer cash system, lost its peg to the U.S. dollar (USD) and collapsed. Before its crash, UST was the fourth-largest stablecoin behind Tether (USDT), USD Coin (USDC) and Binance USD (BUSD), with $18 billion in market capitalization (CoinMarketCap, 2022a). According to Terra’s white paper, its underlying protocol relied on a two-coin system, which was not fully backed by traditional collaterals (e.g. ﬁat currency or gold) (Kereiakes et al., 2019). On the one hand, Terra was the algorithmic stablecoin whose value was pegged to diﬀerent ﬁat currencies, giving rise to ﬁat-based stablecoins, such as TerraUSD, TerraEUR and TerraKRW. On the other hand, Luna token1 (LUNA) was the counterweight used to delete (or, at least, reduce) the volatility from UST. Being more speciﬁc, LUNA-UST protocol was based on two main concepts. First, the protocol stabilised UST prices by ensuring that its supply and demand were in equilibrium through arbitrage, that is, contracting (or expanding) UST pool by using LUNA pool as counterweigth. Second, through the Terra protocol’s algorithmic market module, arbitrageurs were allowed to trade $1 worth of LUNA for 1 UST, and vice versa, regardless of LUNA and UST prices (Shapovalov et al., 2022)2. The most famous project born inside the Terra ecosystem was the Anchor protocol, a lending and borrowing protocol used by UST holders as an high-interest savings account. Before Terra project’s collapse, Anchor attracted the 75% of UST circulating supply oﬀering 20% annual percentage yield (APY) for depositors. Aided by its vicious dependence on the Anchor protocol, Terra project immediately appeared to be heavily exposed to extreme market conditions. On April 2022, Swiss-based crypto exchange, SwissBorg, stated that if LUNA’s price is under pressure, UST holders could be fearing that the UST peg is at risk and decide to redeem their UST positions. In order to do so, UST is burnt and LUNA is minted and sold on the market. This would exacerbate further the decline of LUNA’s price, pushing more UST holders to sell their UST. This vicious cycle is known as “bank run” or “death spiral” (Bonato, 2022). This “death spiral” eﬀectively occurred to LUNA-UST on May 2022. Social media sources relates its origin to a “coordinated attack”, in which market actors strategically used their capital to destabilise the UST peg and generate proﬁts (Morris, 2022). Speciﬁcally, two main events are identiﬁed as the fuse for the Terra collapse. First, private market actors short sold Bitcoin (BTC) with the ﬁnal aim of spreading panic into the market (Hall, 2022; Ashmore, 2022; Locke, 2022). Second, on 07 May 2022, the liquidity pool Curve-3pool suﬀered a “liquidity pool attack”, which caused the ﬁrst UST de-pegging, below $0.99 (Ashmore, 2022; Chainanalysis, 2022). It is worth noting that, on 01 April 2022, Kwon (2022b) announced the launch of a new liquidity pool (4pool) together with DeFi majors Frax Finance and Redacted Cartel. Consequently, 1Some coin-ranking sites, such as CoinMarketCap and Coingecko, use Terra and TerraUSD for the acronyms LUNA and UST. In this paper, to avoid any misconception, we denote Terra as the ﬁat-based stable coin and Luna as the counterpart. 2When UST price was traded below $1 (e.g. $0.99), it implied that supply for UST was higher than demand, thus, it was necessary to contract Terra pool. To rebalance supply and demand, arbitrageurs would have acquired 1 UST for $0.99. Afterwards, they would have swapped 1 UST for $1 of LUNA through the market module, obtaining the corresponding proﬁt (e.g. $0.01). Consequently, 1 UST would have been burned (decreasing its supply and contracting UST pool) and $1 of LUNA would have been minted (increasing its supply and expanding LUNA pool). The arbitrage procedure would have continued, giving rise to an upward pressure on the UST price, due to its continuous supply decrease, until it would have reached the USD peg.

funds were expected to move to the new pool, giving rise to a transitory situation in which Curve-3pool would have been more illiquid and prone to attacks. After the aforementioned “liquidity pool attack”, since 08 May 2022, Luna Foundation Guard (2022) (LFG) started to trade its reserves to restore the USD peg3. As a consequence of this, they were able to obtain some stability around $0.995 until 09 May 2022. On this day, due to the strong and iterated selling pressure, UST lost its peg to USD for the second and last time. On 10 May 2022, LFG sold additional reserves to defend the peg, without success (see Luna Foundation Guard, 2022)4. Terra reserves included a large amount of BTC, thus, according to social media rumors, attackers could have forced LFG to sell BTC on the market, decreasing its price, and increasing the attackers’ proﬁt, whose strategy relied on short selling positions against BTC (Locke, 2022). To save the Terra project, on 11 May 2022 10:10am (UTC), Terra Team announced the endorsement of the community proposal 1164 (Kwon, 2022a), allowing a more eﬃcient mechanism to burn UST and mint LUNA5. Regardless of this, community’s trust on the project was already lost, giving rise to the complete collapse of both tokens. LUNA and UST dropped from a value of $87 and $1, on 05 May 2022, to less than $0.00005 and $0.2, on 13 May 2022, respectively. Proﬁts for potential attackers are estimated to be over 800 millions (Locke, 2022). On this point, it is worth noting that the “coordinated attack”, using BTC to destabilise UST peg, might not have happened at all, since claims of its existence are based on contradictory social media rumors (del Castillo, 2022). In other words, the attack against Terra, which started with a “liquidity pool attack” on Curve-3pool, and the potential existence of short selling positions against BTC, could have been two unrelated operations executed by diﬀerent market actors. The failure of Terra project represents an additional proof of the intrinsic fragility of algorithmic stablecoins which became already evident after the ﬁrst large-scale crypto “bank run” suﬀered by Iron Finance in June 2021. Also Iron Finance was a two-coin system, based on an algorithmic stablecoin (IRON) and on a token counterpart (TITAN), which collapsed after the cascade selloﬀof TITAN due to a signiﬁcant selling pressure by some “whales” (Iron Finance, 2021a). Indeed, the strategy used to bring down Iron Finance was very similar to the one potentially observable in the LUNA-UST case. More speciﬁcally, Iron Finance suﬀered from a “liquidity pool attack”, losing the peg to USD for a short time. Hours later, unknown market actors increased the selling pressure to spread panic, giving rise to the collapse of both IRON and TITAN (Finematics, 2021). Both projects (Iron Finance and Terra) shared a very similar blockchain framework, being prone to the same type of attacks. This duality shows that algorithmic stablecoins are prone to failure due to two main reasons. First, as stated by Clements (2021), they are built on the fragile foundation of relying on uncertain historical variables: they need a support level of baseline demand, they need participation of willing arbitrageurs, and they need an environment of informational eﬃciency. None of these factors are certain, and all of them have proven to be highly tenuous in the context of ﬁnancial crises or periods of extreme volatility. Second, to survive a crash, algorithmic stablecoins need an intrinsic worth, i.e. there should be “genuine economic transactions” reliably performed with their tokens (Calcaterra et al., 2020). This was not the case of Terra, whose stablecoin was mainly used to obtain high interests through the Anchor 3According to Luna Foundation Guard (2022), on 07 May 2022, the reserves included 80 394 BTC, 39 914 BNB, 6 281 671 USDT, 23 555 590 USDC, 1 973 554 AVAX, 697 344 UST, 1 691 261 LUNA. 4On 16 May 2022, the reserves included 313 BTC, 39 914 BNB, 1 973 554 AVAX, 1 847 079 725 UST, 222 713 007 LUNA. 5According to Kwon (2022a), this change should have allowed the system to absorb UST more quickly, reducing its supply and recovering the parity with USD, at the cost of lower prices for LUNA.

protocol. On the contrary, history demonstrates that traditional ﬁat currencies are generally able to survive similar kind of attacks (e.g. Sterling attack in 1992, see Fratianni and Artis, 1996), since they have an intrinsic value as mean of exchange or storing value. As an additional cause of reﬂection, we remark how, nowadays, the role of stablecoins has been only marginally studied by the scientiﬁc community. There are only few studies on stablecoins’ stability (Grobys et al., 2021), their role in portfolio diversiﬁcation (Wang et al., 2020; Baur and Hoang, 2021) and crypto asset price formation (Barucci et al., 2022; Kristoufek, 2022). To the best of our knowledge, the Terra-Luna case has not been addressed in the cryptocurrency literature. In this paper, we provide the scientiﬁc community with the ﬁrst insights on the Terra project’s failure by analysing hourly prices and transaction data through the instruments of network science and herding analysis. 2. Data and quantitative nature of the events 2.1. Hourly data analysis We use hourly closing price data from the CryptoCompare database (CryptoCompare, 2022) for 61 cryptocurrencies from 01 May 2022 00:00 to 16 May 2022 23:00 (UTC)6. This widely used proprietary data source excludes exchanges containing spurious volumes (see Alexander and Dakos, 2020 and Vidal-Tom´as, 2022), ensuring a high standard of data quality. Speciﬁcally, we use data from the Kraken digital currency exchange (the 4th largest exchange for traded volume according to CoinMarketCap, 2022b). Figure. 1: Rescaled hourly closing prices for LUNA, UST and BTC. Main trigger events are plotted with dotted lines: (a) 05 May 2022 12:00, (b) 07 May 2022 22:00, (c) 09 May 2022 14:00, (d) 11 May 2022 10:00. Figure 1 shows rescaled hourly closing prices for LUNA, UST and BTC. Dotted lines underline trigger events that led to the collapse: (a) 05 May 2022 12:00, (b) 07 May 2022 22:00, (c) 09 May 2022 14:00, (d) 11 May 2022 10:00. Since (a) 05 May 2022 12:00, a strong and persistent selling pressure was evident on BTC and LUNA, with negative hourly log-returns7 at 13:00, 14:00 and 15:00, as reported in Table 1. On (b) 07 May 2022 22:00, UST lost its peg to USD for 6The list of cryptocurrencies used in this paper and their corresponding sector according to taxonomy by Messari, 2022, is provided as 7Hourly log-return r for crypto asset i at time t is deﬁned as ri,t = log(pt)/ log(pt−1), where p is the closing price.

the ﬁrst time as a consequence of the “liquidity pool attack” on Curve-3pool (Ashmore, 2022; Chainanalysis, 2022). In response to this event, the LFG intervened, defending the UST peg and recovering the price to around $0.995. However, on (c) 09 May 2022 14:00, UST lost its peg for the second (and last) time, giving rise to the main decrease in both LUNA and UST prices. Finally, on (d) 11 May 10:00, Kwon (2022a) presented the last attempt to defend the peg endorsing the community proposal 1164. After a beneﬁcial impact that led the UST price to 0.8$, this announcement was interpreted by the market as the signal for the expected death of the Terra ecosystem, giving rise to the ﬁnal crash in the market. Table 1: Hourly log-returns for LUNA and BTC after 05 May 2022 12:00 (a). In order to analyse dependency structures in cryptocurrency market during Terra collapse, for each cryptocurrency i, we compute hourly log-returns ri,t. Moreover, to analyse herding behaviour, we also compute equally-weighted (EW) market returns (rm,t). Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for LUNA, UST, BTC and the EW market, which shows the negative tendency of the market during this period. Table 2: Descriptive statistics of hourly log-returns, from 01 May 2022 00:00 to 16 May 2022 23:00 (UTC). 2.2. Transaction data analysis To provide a complete overview of Terra project’s collapse, we analyse public trades (i.e. transaction data) for BTC, LUNA and UST. Compared to hourly prices, which are retrieved from CryptoCompare database (CryptoCompare, 2022), this new dataset is directly sourced from Kraken digital currency exchange using CCXT (Ccxt, 2022) Python package. Figure 2 reports hourly imbalances: positive values denote a selling pressure, while negative ones denote a buying pressure.8 We observe interesting features that could be related to some of the events introduced in Section 1. First, on 05 May 2022 (a), we identify a strong, positive imbalance for BTC, with a value comparable to those detected during the main collapse of LUNA and UST (i.e. from 09 to 11 May 2022 (c-d)). We do not observe comparable high positive imbalance values for LUNA and UST on the same date. Therefore, even though we cannot conﬁrm that short selling positions were opened against BTC as described by diﬀerent social media sources (Hall, 2022; Ashmore, 2022; Locke, 2022), we remark the presence of a considerable selling pressure on this cryptoasset. In other words, if short selling positions were 8In order to compute the imbalance, we ﬁrstly distinguish between public trades on the buy and sell side. We then multiply the volume of each transaction and the price at which it is executed, obtaining the transaction’s costs. We aggregate resulting transactions’ costs by hour. We ﬁnally subtract buy hourly transactions costs from sell hourly transactions costs.

truly opened against BTC, 05 May 2022 should be the most plausible day in which this happened.9 Second, focusing on the UST behaviour, we underline the existence of a remarkable selling pressure since 09 May 2022 (i.e. after the second UST de-pegging). This ﬁnding is particularly relevant, since the selling pressure after the ﬁrst UST de-pegging (b) was remarkably lower than the second one, which could be in line with social media news when contending that attackers caused panic by selling whale-size UST holdings (Hall, 2022; Ashmore, 2022; Locke, 2022). This strategy would be similar to the one used to bring down Iron Finance, given that attackers waited to the second de-pegging, taking advantage of the uncertainty that already dominated the market (Finematics, 2021). Last but not least, it is relevant to emphasise that we cannot conﬁrm the existence of a coordinated attack executed by related market agents. Indeed, the potential short selling against BTC and the Terra attack could have occurred at the same time by chance, in the context of a global economic uncertainty. In the case of Iron Finance collapse, no coordinated attack using a third cryptoasset was detected Figure. 2: Hourly imbalance for LUNA, UST and BTC in the Kraken digital currency exchange. Positive values (red color area) and nega- tive values (green color area) denote selling and buying pressure, respectively. 08 10 12 14 16 18 20 08 10 12 14 16 18 20 Anchor (Anchor, 2022) was a savings protocol designed to allow users from Terra ecosystem to (i) lend capital (UST) and (ii) borrow capital (UST) using bonded assets (bAssets, i.e. tokens representing ownership of an asset on a Proof- of-Stake blockchain) as collateral (see Figure 3). Anchor protocol was at the base of the fast expansion of Terra project since it oﬀered to its depositors up to 20% APY. This scheme was similar to the one used by Iron Finance, which oﬀered more than 100% APY (Iron Finance, 2021b). 9In this line, we also observe higher BTC selling pressure, from (b) to (c). Thus, on these days, market actors could have spread more panic in the market by selling BTC.

Table 3: Main statistics for the Anchor protocol. Total deposit, borrow, and collateral are expressed in UST and millions. Market cap and circulating supply is also expressed in millions. The utilization ratio is deﬁned as borrowed deposits divided by total deposits. Looking at Table 3 it is possible to see how, from 17 June 2021 to 06 May 2022, total UST deposits in Anchor increased by 3826%10. Consequently, before the Terra collapse, this protocol kept the 75% of all the UST circulating supply, leaving the remaining 25% as a means of exchange. According to Platias et al. (2020), Anchor’s mechanism was originally designed to allow the borrower to pay less interest as the utilization ratio (borrowed deposits divided by total deposits) decreased, resulting in lower interests for the depositor. However, despite the decrease in the utilisation ratio, the deposit interest rate was kept around 20% since 2021 (Anchor Protocol, 2021; Jung, 2022). In addition, the deposit interest rate was computed considering the yields of all bAssets used as collateral for borrowing the stablecoin, while its value did not increase signiﬁcantly since January 2022. The unsustainability of the protocol is conﬁrmed by capital infusions into Anchor’s reserves in February 2022 (Kelly, 2022) and by recurrent requests from community members for the modiﬁcation of the interest rates’ mechanism (Anchor Forum, 2022). Compared to ﬁat currencies, UST was mainly used for speculative purposes, which implied that it was more prone to extreme market events. Looking at Table 3, we observe that, from 06 May 2022 to 11 May 2022, the protocol lost around 9.5 billions in UST, i.e. the 69% of the deposits. Thus, once it became evident that both the Terra system and the high-interest rate mechanism were at risk, depositors sold their UST igniting the bank run. Figure. 3: Minimal schema representing the Anchor protocol’s working mechanism. Users from Terra ecosystem were allowed to use Anchor protocol to (i) lend capital (UST) and (ii) borrow capital (UST) using bonded assets (bAssets) as collateral. 10Data from Anchor protocol dashboard is available since 17 June 2021. No data are available on 07 May 2022.

3.1. Network analysis: Triangulated Maximally Filtered Graph (TMFG) To get more insights into Terra project’s failure, we describe the evolution of dependency structures among cryp- tocurrencies during the crash. In order to do this, we use instruments provided by network science. Networks have been extensively used to study ﬁnancial systems (Mantegna, 1999; Aste et al., 2010; Briola and Aste, 2022) modeling depen- dencies among assets through correlations. Diﬀerent correlation measures capture diﬀerent relationships among assets. We decide to use the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient to model linear relations among cryptocurrencies. It is worth noting that, in a condition of stress of the underlying system, pure correlations might be aﬀected by an excessive sensitiveness. In order to partially mitigate such an eﬀect, we assign a structure of weights to observational events, giving more rele- vance to the last observations of a given window. Weighted correlations are found to be smoother and recovering faster from market’s turbulence than their unweighted counterparts, helping also to discriminate more eﬀectively genuine from spurious correlations. Following the deﬁnition in Pozzi et al. (2012), we deﬁne the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient weighted with exponential smoothing as follows: where wt = w0e , ∀t ∈{1, 2, . . . , ∆t} ∧θ > 0 represents an exponentially smoothed weight structure such that t=1 wt = 1 and yw t . ∆t corresponds to rolling windows made of 24 hours with steps of 1 hour each and θ is here set to 0.3. Such a deﬁnition can be used to build a range of networks representing dependency structures among cryptocurrencies (Briola and Aste, 2022). Here we use the state-of-the-art methodology, namely, Triangulated Maximally Filtered Graph (TMFG) (Massara et al., 2017). Such a ﬁltering network comes with several advantages compared to its alternatives. It is able to capture meaningful interactions among multiple assets and it is characterised by topological constraints which help to regularise for probabilistic modeling (Aste, 2022). As a measure of network centrality, we compute the eigenvector centrality, which allows us to measure the inﬂuence of a crypto-asset in the system. Intuitively, a cryptocurrency has an higher eigenvector centrality as long as it is connected to other relevant cryptocurrencies, which are also characterised by an high eigenvector centrality. In order to highlight relevant events and reduce the impact of secondary ones, also in this case, we compute an exponentially smoothed rolling average of the signal with a smoothing factor equals to 0.3.11 In this study, we also use the approach proposed by Chang et al. (2000) to study the possible emergence of herd behaviour during Terra collapse. This method is based on the notion of herding towards market consensus in which “herds are characterised by individuals who suppress their own beliefs and base their investment decisions solely on the collective actions of the market, even when they disagree with its predictions” (Christie and Huang, 1995). More 11Results are consistent to diﬀerent values of θ.

speciﬁcally, Chang et al. (2000) analysed the existence of herding in a system of N assets through the cross-sectional absolute deviation of returns (CSAD) as a measure of return dispersion, and regressing the CSAD of returns with respect to market returns, CSADm,t = α + β1|rm,t| + β2r2 where |rm,t| is the absolute term and r2 m,t denotes the square of market returns. Chang et al. (2000) noted that rational asset-pricing models imply a linear relation between the dispersion in individual asset returns and the return on a market portfolio. As the market’s absolute return grows, cross-sectional return dispersion would also be expected to rise, in a linear fashion. Conversely, during periods of euphoria or fear, investors may react in a more uniform manner, giving rise to herding behavior. This phenomenon will decrease the dispersion among returns or at least increase at a less- than-proportional rate with the market return. Therefore, the emergence of herding behaviour will be consistent with a signiﬁcantly negative coeﬃcient β2 in Eq.(3). However, in the absence of herding, we should only observe a positive and linear relation between the cross-sectional return dispersion and absolute market returns, i.e. a signiﬁcant positive coeﬃcient β1, and a non-signiﬁcant coeﬃcient β2. In this line, given that Eq.(3) represents the symmetric form that includes all the market return distribution, following Cui et al. (2019) and Chiang and Zheng (2010) we also divided market returns to distinguish asymmetric herding when the market is up or down, CSADm,t = α + β1(1 −D)|rm,t| + β2D|rm,t| + β3(1 −D)r2 where (1 −D) and D are dummy variables equal to 1 when rm,t ≥0 and rm,t < 0, respectively.12 4.1. Correlations and network analysis Figure 4 reports exponentially smoothed average correlation coeﬃcients for LUNA, UST, BTC and Kraken exchange13. We observe that, until 09 May 2022 12:00 (c), the market (Kraken) showed sporadic peaks of high correlations, such as the one observed after the ﬁrst UST de-pegging (b). Starting from the second UST de-pegging, between 09 May 2022 12:00 (c) and 11 May 2022 10:00 (d), we identify a continuous increase in market correlations, until it stabilised for a short time around 0.8. Considering that we use exponentially smoothed weighted correlations, which weight more the last hours of the window, we state that this constant increase in correlations shows that the market kept a high co-movement at each hour until 11 May 2022. 12Following the corresponding literature (e.g. Chang et al., 2000; Chiang and Zheng, 2010), in Eq.(3) and Eq.(4), we used Newey-West standard errors (Newey and West, 1994). 13Kraken digital currency exchange represents the average correlation of all the 61 cryptocurrencies at our disposal.

Figure. 4: Exponentially smoothed weighted correlations for LUNA, UST and Kraken digital currency exchange, using 24 hour rolling win- dows with steps of 1 hour each. Kraken (blue line) denotes the average correlation of all the 61 cryptocurrencies, while LUNA (red line), UST (green line) and BTC (orange line) represent their average correlation with the rest of the system. Therefore, from (c) to (d), we detect the speciﬁc period when most of the market reacted to Terra collapse, coinciding with the main decrease in UST and LUNA prices (see Figure 1). Afterwards, we observe a decrease in correlations in LUNA, UST, BTC and Kraken digital currency exchange. This new scenario shows that the ﬁrst two cryptocurrencies were “excluded” from the system given their “death”, while the system seems to recover a lower and more stable degree Figure. 5: Eigenvector centrality of LUNA, UST and BTC using 24h rolling windows. Color areas show the distribution of the eigenvector centrality for the rest of cryptocurrencies considering 1%-99%, 5%-95%, and 25%-75% percentiles.

After obtaining an initial picture through the study of market correlations, we compute the TMFG to obtain a better description of the system’s collective dynamics. Figure 5 reports the evolution of TMFG’s eigenvector centrality, through 24 hour rolling windows, for LUNA, UST and BTC. From (a) 05 May 2022 12:00 to (b) 07 May 2022 22:00, we observe that BTC was inﬂuencing the rest of the system, given its higher eigenvector centrality. This ﬁnding potentially supports the hypothesis of its involvement during the initial down-market since 05 May 2022 12:00. On (b) 07 May 2022 22:00, we identify the eﬀect of the ﬁrst Terra de-pegging on the cryptocurrency market’s dependency structure, since LUNA became part of the core of the network, inﬂuencing the cryptocurrency market for a short time (see Figure 6). Since that day, LUNA was excluded from the core of the network, gradually lowering its eigenvector centrality. This ﬁnding can be observed in the network reported in Figure 7, during the second UST de-pegging on 09 May 2022 12:00 (c). Finally, after (d) 11 May 2022 10:00, LUNA was completely excluded from the system, being relegated in the lowest eigenvector Figure. 6: TMFG on 7 May 2022 22:00 UTC (b). As an eﬀect of the ﬁrst Terra de-pegging, LUNA became central into cryptocurrency market’s dependency structure, inﬂuencing it for a short time. 4.2. Herding analysis: CSAD approach Table (4) shows the results of the analysis of the herding behaviour in the cryptocurrency market during Terra collapse. Interestingly, despite the fact that the cryptocurrency market is more interconnected over time (Aslanidis et al., 2021) and herding is traditionally found on periods of uncertainty (da Gama Silva et al., 2019), we do not observe herding during the Terra collapse. In particular, we report signiﬁcant positive coeﬃcients for |rm,t|, (1 −D)|rm,t|, and D|rm,t|, 14Regarding UST, we do not observe relevant changes in terms of eigenvector centrality given its nature as stablecoin. Thus, even though connections with other cryptocurrencies could exist, most of them were non-signiﬁcant.

Figure. 7: TMFG on 9 May 2022 12:00 UTC (c). As an eﬀect of the second Terra de-pegging, LUNA was completely excluded from the core of the network. while we underline non-signiﬁcant coeﬃcients for r2 m,t.15 This result supports the existence of an heterogeneous performance in the cryptocurrency market during this period. In Table 5 we report average hourly returns from (b) 07 May 2022 22:00 to (d) 11 May 2022 10:00, where we observe that some cryptocurrencies, like BTC and ETH, were characterised by a “better” (less negative) performance, compared to the rest of the market, whose average was equal to −0.0031. Consequently, even though we observe higher Pearson correlation coeﬃcients during the collapse [see Figure 4], UST-LUNA failure did not dramatically aﬀected the market due to the absence of herding and the low reaction of BTC [see Figure 6]. We could conjecture that investors considered this event as a non-structural shock, which did not posed real risk to jeopardise the future of the cryptocurrency system. Table 4: Regression results of CSADt on market returns. Both generalised form and distinguishing between positive and negative market returns. Signiﬁcance at the 1%/5%/10% level is denoted by ***/**/*. In this section, we use data from Binance digital currency exchange (the largest digital currency exchange platform according to CoinMarketCap (2022b)) to assess the robustness of our results. Data retrieving is entirely accomplished 15For robustness purposes, we applied Eq.(4) through rolling windows of 7 days, i.e. 168 hours/observations. However, the absence of herding remains. Moreover, if we remove stablecoins from our sample, whose returns are mainly 0 (e.g. USDT or DAI), we keep obtaining the

Table 5: Average hourly log-returns from (b) 07 May 2022 22:00 to (d) 11/05/2022 10:00. First row of cryptocurrencies shows the most negative average returns, while the second row shows the most positive returns. using the CCXT (Ccxt, 2022) Python package. Compared to Kraken, Binance’s cross-rates are expressed in BUSD (BinanceUSD), which could give rise to some inconsistencies in comparative studies (see e.g. Alexander and Dakos, 2020). Consequently, we use it only in the context of robustness analysis. For the sake of space, we only report results where we observe more signiﬁcant diﬀerences (see Figure 8). The rest of the results are consistent with the ones observed in Kraken and are available upon request. In Figure 8 we show two relevant ﬁndings. First, in line with Kraken (see Figure 2), on 05 May 2022 (a), we identify a high positive imbalance for BTC, which is remarkably lower only than a peak after the Terra project’s collapse. This result enforces the ﬁnding that if short-selling positions were opened against BTC, this potentially happened on 05 May 2022. Second, focusing on UST, contrary to what observed on Kraken, we ﬁnd a considerable degree of buying pressure during the Terra project’s collapse. This ﬁnding could imply that Binance was used by LFG and/or other market actors to defend the UST peg.16 Figure. 8: Hourly imbalance for LUNA, UST and BTC. Positive values (red color area) and negative values (green color area) denote sell- ing and buying pressure, respectively. Binance exchange. 08 10 12 14 16 18 20 08 10 12 14 16 18 20 16In the case of LUNA, we observe high instability since 13 May 2022, which could be caused by speculators trading when the price was close to 0 or by the run to positions’ liquidation.

6. Implications and future research 6.1. Relevance for stakeholders Considering that the failure of large stablecoins built upon inappropriate decentralized ﬁnance frameworks (e.g. lack of collateral and dependencies with liquidity providers) could give rise to potential ﬁnancial stability risks, we believe that our results are relevant for both investors and policymakers. Applications of stablecoins within the crypto space remarkably increased since 2020, while poorly supported by adequate regulation. Initially, they were used as: (i) bridge between ﬁat currencies and crypto-assets; (ii) “parking space” for crypto volatility (Adachi et al., 2022). Nowadays, they are also used to provide most of the liquidity in DeFi applications such as decentralised exchanges and lending protocols (e.g. UST and Anchor protocol). Consequently, stablecoins play a critical role within the crypto space, where they are involved in almost 75% of the entire trading (Adachi et al., 2021). Largest stablecoins represent a primary source of risk according to the European Central Bank (ECB), which states that a “bank run” on Tether could disrupt trading and price discovery in crypto-asset markets, which could turn disorderly (ECB, 2022). Therefore, even though the collapse of UST was not able to rise relevant herding eﬀects, the failure of larger stablecoins could generate systemic eﬀects on the whole crypto universe. In addition, considering the growing interlinks between crypto-assets and the traditional ﬁnancial system, the failure of stablecoins could also have implications external to the crypto space. These scenarios remark the need for a Global Stablecoin Standard and continuously updated regulations able to guarantee (i) a process for fulﬁlling holders’ redemption claims, (ii) proper transparency of reserve asset composition and (iii) development of appropriate risk-management frameworks. Relevant regulatory standard-setting bodies (Financial Stability Board and Bank of International Settlements; see, e.g. Bank for International Settlements, 2022) and governments (Japan, Hong Kong, United Kingdom, European Union and the United States; see, e.g. Asmakov, 2022, European Council, 2022) are already proposing robust rules for these digital assets. It would be beneﬁcial that contributions from inside the DeFi community would also be proposed. 6.2. Future lines of research Most of the existing literature on stablecoins concerns their stability (Grobys et al., 2021), their role in portfolio diver- siﬁcation (Wang et al., 2020; Baur and Hoang, 2021), and crypto asset price formation (Barucci et al., 2022; Kristoufek, 2022). Due to the nascent interest in this research ﬁeld and the rapid growth of decentralised ﬁnance, gaps in the literature still exist. Recent events around Terra project highlights the need to analyse speciﬁc topics that have been neglected until now: (i) stablecoins as a means of exchange, (ii) stablecoins’ role within the crypto space, (iii) regulation on stablecoins and related protocols and (iv) potential risk to ﬁnancial stability. First, stablecoins could not be appropriate as a mean of exchange due to their vulnerability to “bank runs” and high transaction costs compared to non-blockchain alternatives (Mizrach, 2022). Second, the role of stablecoins as “bridge” in the crypto space could be considered a double-edged sword since they could jeopardise the system’s stability once becoming systemic. Third, the dependence of UST on Anchor protocol remarks the need for better scrutiny of third party protocols related to any stablecoin. Finally, it would be necessary to consider scenarios in which speciﬁc fragilities within the stablecoins’ ecosystem may give rise to systemic

In this paper, we review the Terra project’s main features and describe the mechanisms that led to its failure. Our contribution to the existing literature is threefold. We ﬁrst systematically organise news from heterogeneous sources to reconstruct a reliable timeline for the Terra project’s collapse. We hence identify four main breakpoints for the crash and, starting from hourly data for 61 cryptocurrencies from Kraken digital currency exchange, we quantitatively characterise them. We exploit the power of smoothed weighted correlations to build state-of-the-art graph structures which demonstrate to be both able to eﬃciently capture dependency structures among cryptocurrencies and robust to extreme market conditions. As a further element of novelty, we enforce our analysis using transaction data to detect relevant micro-structural market events. Combining these last two approaches, we uncover BTC’s reference role during the ﬁrst phase of the collapse. particular, we outline the existence of intense selling pressure on this crypto asset and identify 05 May 2022 as the potential fuse for the process that led to the Terra project’s failure. We remark that it is impossible to conclude that this event and the Terra project’s collapse were part of a coordinated strategy (del Castillo, 2022). The weakness of the current global economy (e.g. Russia - Ukraine conﬂict (Boungou and Yati´e, 2022), bear markets in the main ﬁnancial indices (Krauskopf, 2022), and higher federal funds rates (Cox, 2022)) could have caused “the perfect storm” in the cryptocurrency market. Moreover, it is relevant to consider that the vicious dependence of the Terra project on the Anchor protocol could have increased its exposure to heterogeneous speculative strategies that occurred simultaneously by chance. We also show how, after 07 May 2022, LUNA is quickly marginalised by the rest of the network’s components. This last ﬁnding enforces the conjecture that investors considered this collapse a non-structural shock, which is supported by the impossibility of detecting a herding behaviour during the down market. Finally, to prove our results’ robustness, we compare buy/selling dynamics detected on Kraken digital currency ex- change with those detected on Binance, highlighting how adverse market actors could have used multiple exchanges to attack/defend the Terra ecosystem. The author, A.B. acknowledges Dr. Silvia Bartolucci for her precious support in data retrieving. The author, D.V- T., acknowledges the ﬁnancial support from the Margarita Salas contract MGS/2021/13 (UP2021-021) ﬁnanced by the European Union-NextGenerationEU. The author, T.A, acknowledges the ﬁnancial support from ESRC (ES/K002309/1), EPSRC (EP/P031730/1) and EC (H2020-ICT-2018-2 825215). All the authors acknowledge Cryptocompare for easing the data access. All the authors acknowledge Miranda Zhang for her help in producing graphical representations. Adachi, M., Born, A., Gschossmann, I., and Van der Kraaij, A. (2021). The expanding functions and uses of stablecoins. Financial Stability Review (ECB).

Adachi, M., Pereira Da Silva, P. B., Born, A., Cappuccio, M., Cz´ak-Ludwig, S., Gschossmann, I., Paula, G., Pellicani, A., Philipps, S.-M., Mirjam, P., Rossteuscher, I., and Zeoli, P. (2022). Stablecoins’ role in crypto and beyond: functions, risks and policy. European Central Bank. Alexander, C. and Dakos, M. (2020). A critical investigation of cryptocurrency data and analysis. Quantitative Finance, Anchor (2022). Anchor protocol Dashboard. https://app.anchorprotocol.com/. Anchor Forum (2022). Dynamic Anchor Earn Rate. https://forum.anchorprotocol.com/t/dynamic-anchor-earn-rate/3042. Ashmore, D. (2022). What happened ust, and was it an attack? Invezz. 11 May. Aslanidis, N., Bariviera, A. F., and Perez-Laborda, A. (2021). Are cryptocurrencies becoming more interconnected? Asmakov, A. (2022). Japan passes stablecoin bill aimed at protecting crypto investors. Decrypt. Aste, T. (2022). Topological regularization with information ﬁltering networks. Information Sciences, 608:655–669. Aste, T., Shaw, W., and Di Matteo, T. (2010). Correlation structure and dynamics in volatile markets. New Journal of Bank for International Settlements (2022). Application of theprinciples for ﬁnancial market infrastructures tostablecoin arrangements. Technical report. 22 July 2022. A deep dive into crypto-markets: not compare oranges with apples. See UCL - Financial Computing and Analytics seminar: Baur, D. G. and Hoang, L. T. (2021). A crypto safe haven against bitcoin. Finance Research Letters, 38:101431. Bonato (2022). TerraLuna & UST - Risk Assessment. https://hubs.ly/Q017Ww2S0. Boungou, W. and Yati´e, A. (2022). The impact of the ukraine–russia war on world stock market returns. Economics Briola, A. and Aste, T. (2022). Dependency structures in cryptocurrency market from high to low frequency. Calcaterra, C., Kaal, W. A., and Rao, V. (2020). Stable cryptocurrencies: First order principles. Stan. J. Blockchain L. Ccxt (2022). Ccxt - cryptocurrency exchange trading library. https://github.com/ccxt/ccxt.

Chainanalysis (2022). The trades that triggered ust’s collapse. Technical report. 9 June 2022. Chang, E. C., Cheng, J. W., and Khorana, A. (2000). An examination of herd behavior in equity markets: An international perspective. Journal of Banking & Finance, 24(10):1651–1679. Chiang, T. C. and Zheng, D. (2010). An empirical analysis of herd behavior in global stock markets. Journal of Banking Christie, W. G. and Huang, R. D. (1995). Following the pied piper: Do individual returns herd around the market? Financial Analysts Journal, 51(4):31–37. Clements, R. (2021). Built to fail: The inherent fragility of algorithmic stablecoins. Wake Forest L. Rev. Online, 11:131. Historical data for terraclassicusd. Top cryptocurrency spot exchanges. Cox, J. (2022). Fed hikes interest rates by 0.75 percentage point for second consecutive time to ﬁght inﬂation. CNBC. CryptoCompare (2022). Data from Cryptocompare, www.cryptocompare.com. Cui, Y., Gebka, B., and Kallinterakis, V. (2019). Do closed-end fund investors herd? Journal of Banking & Finance, da Gama Silva, P. V. J., Klotzle, M. C., Pinto, A. C. F., and Gomes, L. L. (2019). Herding behavior and contagion in the cryptocurrency market. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance, 22:41–50. del Castillo, M. (2022). Blackrock and citadel deny trading cratering stablecoin. Forbes. May11. ECB, D. G. M. P. . F. S. (2022). Market sensitivity to pace of policy normalisation. Financial Stability Review. European Council (2022). Digital ﬁnance: agreement reached on european crypto-assets regulation (mica). Technical report. 22 July 2022. Finematics (2021). Bank run in deﬁ– iron ﬁnance ﬁasco explained. Technical report. 9 June 2022. Fratianni, M. and Artis, M. J. (1996). The lira and the pound in the 1992 currency crisis: Fundamentals or speculation? Open economies review, 7(1):573–589. Grobys, K., Junttila, J., Kolari, J. W., and Sapkota, N. (2021). On the stability of stablecoins. Journal of Empirical Hall, J. (2022). Luna meltdown sparks theories and told-you-sos from crypto community. Cointelegraph. 11 May. Iron Finance (2021a). Iron ﬁnance post-mortem. Technical report. 17 June 2021.

Iron Finance (2021b). our apy is way higher. you are still showing apr :). Twitter. Jung, C. (2022). Earn 20Medium. 17 February. Kelly, L. J. (2022). We need to talk about terra’s anchor. Decrypt. Kereiakes, E., Do Kwon, M. D. M., and Platias, N. (2019). Terra money: Stability and adoption. White Paper, Apr. Krauskopf, L. (2022). Bear market conﬁrmed as u.s. stocks’ 2022 descent deepens. Reuters. Kristoufek, L. (2022). On the role of stablecoins in cryptoasset pricing dynamics. Financial Innovation, 8(1):1–26. Kwon, D. (2022a). 1/ dear terra community. Twitter. https://twitter.com/stablekwon/status/1524331171189956609. Kwon, D. (2022b). 1/ introducing the 4pool. Twitter. https://twitter.com/stablekwon/status/1510021707377287170. Locke, T. (2022). Did a ‘concerted attack’ cause terra’s ust to crash below $1? an exec behind the largest stablecoin and experts agree it’s suspicious. Fortune. Mantegna, R. N. (1999). Hierarchical structure in ﬁnancial markets. The European Physical Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems, 11(1):193–197. Massara, G. P., Di Matteo, T., and Aste, T. (2017). Network ﬁltering for big data: Triangulated maximally ﬁltered graph. Journal of complex Networks, 5(2):161–178. Messari (2022). Messari: Messari crypto research, data, and tools. Accessed: 2022-07-19, https://messari.io. Survivorship, transactions costs and exchange microstructure. Morris, D. Z. (2022). There was no terra ‘attack’. Coindesk. 11 May. Newey, W. K. and West, K. D. (1994). Automatic lag selection in covariance matrix estimation. The Review of Economic Platias, N., Lee, E. J., and Di Maggio, M. (2020). Anchor: Gold standard for passive incomeon the blockchain. Pozzi, F., Di Matteo, T., and Aste, T. (2012). Exponential smoothing weighted correlations. The European Physical Quiroz-Gutierrez, M. (2022). Who is do kwon, the ‘lunatic’ who created a $60 billion cryptocurrency that collapsed in days? Fortune. May 18. Shapovalov, V., Hays, D., Kravchenko, I., Rosenberg, H., Valentin, A., Malkin, N., and Mendoza, R. (2022). Terra luna: Can digital assets boost the e-commerce market? Technical report, Cointelegraph.

Vidal-Tom´as, D. (2022). Which cryptocurrency data sources should scholars use? International Review of Financial Wang, G.-J., Ma, X.-y., and Wu, H.-y. (2020). Are stablecoins truly diversiﬁers, hedges, or safe havens against traditional cryptocurrencies as their name suggests? Research in International Business and Finance, 54:101225.

List of the 61 cryptocurrencies analysed in the current paper. For each asset, the symbol, the name and the corresponding sector according to the taxonomy proposed by Messari (2022) is reported. There is no consensus on a unique mapping between cryptocurrencies and sectors. The chosen taxonomy is the one adopted by Kraken digital currency exchange. Kyber Network Crystal v2 Virtual And Augmented Reality

---NEW PAPER---

A Network Analysis of the Cryptocurrency Market The Hang Seng University of Hong Department of Supply Chain and The Hang Seng University of Hong Hong Kong – Shenzhen Finance The Chinese University of Hong Kong Abstract—In this study, we conduct a network analysis with centrality measures, using historical daily close prices of top 120 cryptocurrencies between 2013 and 2020, to study and understand the dynamic evolution and characteristics of the cryptocurrency market. Our study has two primary findings: cryptocurrencies is weakening from 2013 to 2016 and then strengthening thereafter; (2) cryptocurrencies that are primarily used for transaction payment, notably BTC, dominate the market until mid-2016, followed by those developed for applications using blockchain as the underlying technology, particularly data storage and recording such as MAID and FCT, between mid-2016 and mid-2017. Since then, ETH, alongside with its strongly correlated cryptocurrencies have replaced BTC to become the benchmark cryptocurrencies. Furthermore, during COVID-19, QTUM and BNB have intermittently replaced ETH to take the leading positions due to their active community engagement during the pandemic. Over the past two decades, there has been considerable work on how network analysis can be used to better understand the financial markets [1]. Network can be used to model the interactions among different financial assets such as stocks, currencies and commodities. One of the prominent techniques is the use of correlation-based network to understand and forecast the dynamics in the financial markets. In a network, nodes and edges represent financial assets and their correlations, respectively. Then, network construction methods are used to construct less complex networks that typically include important nodes and edges, e.g. those with strong correlation. With these networks, centrality measures can be used to identify important or influential nodes or assets that play leadership roles in the financial markets. The aim of this paper is to apply network analysis with centrality measures to analyze the cryptocurrency market, which has been receiving increased attention in recent years. Using historical daily close price of top 120 cryptocurrencies between 2013 and 2020, we aim to understand the current cryptocurrency market by studying its: (1) correlation structure, dynamic evolution and characteristics; (2) stability of the cryptocurrency network that models the market; (3) most influential cryptocurrencies during different stages of the evolution. In addition, based on our empirical results, we draw some conclusions for investors who are interested in a short-term trading strategy in the cryptocurrency market. Network analysis can be used to identify important or influential nodes in a network. It has been extensively employed to identify influential stocks, currencies, and commodities in many different corresponding markets across the world [1, 19]. With respect to the cryptocurrency market, © IEEE 2021. This article is free to access and download, along with rights for full text and data mining, re-use and analysis. the work in [2] conducted a correlation analysis and discovered that those that were similar in their codebases were positively correlated. The work in [3] used network analysis to analyze 16 cryptocurrencies using the Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) and hierarchical tree methods. The evolution of the cryptocurrency market is also studied in [5]. However, all their analysis focused either on a specific (or spliced) time period or on a specific set of cryptocurrencies, which did not investigate the time-varying or dynamic evolution of the influential cryptocurrencies over a longer period of time as the cryptocurrencies are entering the market at different times. In this study, we adopt a network construction method together with five centrality measures to investigate the dynamic evolution and characteristics of the cryptocurrency market over seven years between 2013 and 2020. We further study which cryptocurrencies are influential during which periods of the evolution, including the COVID- 19 pandemic, as well as draw some conclusions for investors who are interested in a short-term trading strategy in the The dataset used in this study is the time series of daily close prices of top 120 cryptocurrencies by market cryptocurrencies can be considered as a good representative of the cryptocurrency market since it represents more than 90% of the total cryptocurrency market capitalization as of this date. Our data covers the period from 29.04.2013 (i.e. the first day when BTC close price becomes available in the http://coinmarketcap.com [17]. There are up to 2665 daily returns for each cryptocurrency time series data during the period investigated as the cryptocurrencies entered the market at different times. All the cryptocurrency prices are quoted in USD. As time series data may contain trends and seasonality, they may need to be removed prior to modeling. In addition to this, since the time series data of many cryptocurrencies is non-stationary, we therefore transform the prices into logarithmic returns using the formula: where  and  are the return and the close price of cryptocurrency i at day t, respectively. In our case,    day. Another reason for this transformation is to make  independent of the price scale, e.g. a cryptocurrency change from 10 to 11 BTC will have the same logarithmic difference as a change from, 500 to 550 BTC. This makes a comparison among cryptocurrencies at different price scales possible. A. Cross-return Correlation Coefficient Matrix The input to construct a network for analysis is the return correlation among all pairs of cryptocurrency. We first create a cross-return correlation coefficient matrix using the Pearson 2020 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI) December 1-4, 2020, Canberra, Australia Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on February 17,2026 at 14:55:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

cryptocurrency i and j as follows: where  represents the return vector of cryptocurrency i of a time period (i.e. 182 days or 6 months in this study as we will evaluate the impact of COVID-19 on the cryptocurrency market with the length of each time window being the current length or duration of the pandemic since its outbreak. The value of each cross-return correlation coefficient matrix item ranges from -1 to 1. When the value approaches 1, the two corresponding cryptocurrencies move similarly, i.e. when the return of one increases, then the return of the second increases similarly. On the contrary, when the value approaches -1, the movement of the two cryptocurrencies vary inversely (i.e. increases the first means decreases the second). When the value is 0, prediction may not be possible as the two cryptocurrencies vary in a random way. The result of the calculation is a N x N cross-return correlation coefficient matrix where N is the total number of the cryptocurrencies (i.e. N = 120 in this study), and the diagonal of the matrix is equal to 1 as any cryptocurrency has a perfect correlation with itself. When constructing a network, a node represents a cryptocurrency while an edge represents the return correlation between the connected cryptocurrency node pair. A complete or fully connected network is then constructed, which often contains a large amount of redundant information. Several network construction methods, such as Minimum Spanning Tree (MST), Threshold Network (TN) and Plane Maximum Filter Graph (PMFG), have been proposed to reduce the network complexity by including meaningful nodes and edges only for studying correlations of financial time series (e.g. edges with strong correlation). However, the aim of our work is not to investigate and compare which method performs better than the others but to exploit their own advantages to filter pertinent information from a complex network modeling the return correlation for all pairs of the cryptocurrencies (a detailed review of these network construction methods is discussed in [6]). For the rest of this paper, we adopt MST to construct cryptocurrency networks as it is simple and includes all the cryptocurrencies for our analysis. Nevertheless, we have also implemented and performed our evaluation using the networks constructed by TN and PMFG, and reached similar results and findings to the MST, thus making our With the cross-return correlation coefficient matrix, we construct an undirected network using MST. Studying the pattern of connections in the networks would provide helpful information about the internal structure of the cryptocurrency market. Constructing the MST network requires a variable to measure the distance, satisfying the three axioms of • Positive Definiteness:   • Symmetry:    • Triangular Inequality:  ' ( ) ( The distance that satisfies that above three axioms is derived by the work in [7]:   *   where  denotes the distance between nodes i and j. The distance function measures a distance between a pair of cryptocurrencies using their return correlation coefficient. The mapping between the return correlation coefficient and the distance function ranges from 0, for totally correlated cryptocurrencies (i.e. when the return correlation coefficient is equal to 1), to 2 for totally anti-correlated cryptocurrencies (i.e. when the return correlation coefficient is equal to -1). For uncorrelated cryptocurrencies, the distance is +* . This transformation creates a N x N distance matrix from the N x N cross-return correlation coefficient matrix. We use the method outline in [7] for constructing the MST network, which is a graph constructed by linking N nodes with N – 1 edges without loops such that the sum of all edge distance is the minimum, i.e., the MST network uses the N – 1 linkage to extract the most important information from the cross-return correlation C. Moving Time Window Analysis Fig. 1. Moving time window analysis We adopt moving time window approach, as shown in Figure 1, to study the evolution of the cryptocurrency network over a period of 7 years. The reason for using this approach is that cryptocurrencies are progressively entering the market at different times and we avoid restricting our work to only a specific set of cryptocurrencies in a specific time period when their close prices become completely available. The question to be researched is which cryptocurrencies are influential during which periods of time. To look at the affiliation between the return of cryptocurrency i and j, we calculate the cross-return correlation coefficient matrix for all trading days in the entire studied time period. The data is divided timewise into M windows t = 1, 2, …, M of width T corresponding to the number of daily return included in each window. Several consecutive windows overlap with each other, the extent of which is dictated by the window step length parameter T, describing the displacement of the window, measured also in trading days. The choice of window width is a trade-off between too noisy and too smoothed data for small and large window widths, respectively. Our results are calculated from daily stepped 182-day windows (i.e. 6 months). With 365 trading days a year in the cryptocurrency market, we use T = 1 day and T = 182 days. Each time window thus contains 182 daily returns. With these parameters, the overall number of windows is M = 2483. This procedure allows us to accurately Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on February 17,2026 at 14:55:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

reflect the structural changes of the cryptocurrency network using relatively small intervals between shifts, but at the same time, it can maintain sufficiently large sample sizes of the cryptocurrency pricing data for calculating the cross-return correlation coefficient matrix for each shift. Note that, as our starting date is 29.04.2013, there is only a few cryptocurrencies in our dataset. As time goes on, more cryptocurrencies have been progressively added into the market. In this case, in order to have a reasonable number of observations to draw meaningful conclusions, we consider the cross-return correlation coefficient between any two cryptocurrencies to be valid if and only if both of them have T = 182 daily return for a given time window; otherwise, the correlation would not be considered and thus no edge would be created in the network, e.g. in a given time window, cryptocurrency X and Y have respectively 80 and 182 daily returns since Y joins the market earlier than X. As such, there is no correlation coefficient and edge exist between X and Y in this time window. To analyzing a network, it is useful to use well-established centrality to identify important or influential cryptocurrencies that are located in the core part of the network. We use the following five commonly used centrality in this study [8]. A. Degree Centrality (DC) The degree centrality of node v is simply the total number of its immediate connected neighbor nodes and is defined as: 7 - 8 9 where V is the set of all nodes, :;< is an adjacency matrix in which value is equal to 1 if v and u are connected to each other; otherwise it is equal to 0. The degree centrality values are normalized by dividing the possible maximum number of edges in a network N - 1 where N is the number of nodes. DC measures the relative significance or power of a cryptocurrency, in terms of the number of edges upon it, that cryptocurrency node with a higher DC score is likely to influent the behavior of more other cryptocurrencies that are directly connected to it. B. Node Strength (NS) An extension to the degree centrality is to further consider the correlation in addition to the number of their immediate neighbor nodes since a larger number of immediate connected neighbor nodes may not indicate a stronger correlation with these neighbor nodes. The node strength of node v is the sum of the correlation of v (i.e. edges) with all other nodes to which it is connected and is defined as: :;<7 - 8 9 Node strength measures how strong a cryptocurrency is correlated with the others and integrates the information of both its connectivity and the significance of its edges in terms of their total correlation. This can be taken into account as the normal generalization of the connectivity. C. Betweenness Centrality (BC) The betweenness centrality of node v is the sum of the fraction of all-pairs shortest paths that pass through v: where EF7  is the number of the shortest path between nodes s and t, and EF7 D- is the number of shortest paths passing through v between s and t. If s = t, EF7   , and if -GF7 7 EF7 D-  . BC is used to quantify the control of a cryptocurrency node on information flow in the network. Therefore, cryptocurrency nodes with high scores are considered as significant cryptocurrencies in terms of their roles in coordinating the information among cryptocurrencies. Thus, the higher the value of A-, the more the node is likely to be an intermediate node or broker that transfers or coordinates information from one node to another through it. D. Closeness Centrality (CC) Closeness centrality of node v is the reciprocal of the sum of the shortest path distances from v to N - 1 other nodes. Since the sum of distances depends on the number of nodes in the network, closeness is normalized by the sum of minimum possible distances (i.e. N – 1) and is defined as: 7 - 8 9 where ;< is the shortest path distance between v and u. CC measures how close a cryptocurrency node to all other cryptocurrency nodes. The higher the score of a cryptocurrency node, the faster the cryptocurrency spread information from it to all others. Therefore, it represents the cryptocurrency to the others. This is based on an idea saying that if one cryptocurrency can reach others quickly, this cryptocurrency is at the central position in a network. E. Eigenvector Centrality (EC) Node degree may not be seen as a sufficient representation of how important or influential a node is, for it does not take into account how important the neighbors of a node may be. As an example, one node may have a low degree centrality, but it may be connected with other nodes with very high DC or NS, so it is, in some way, influential. A measure that takes into account the degree of neighboring nodes when calculating the importance of a node is called eigenvector centrality. In order to define it properly, one must first define an adjacency matrix, J, whose element # is 1 if there is a connection ! and &, and 0 otherwise. The EC of node v is: 7 - 8 9 Compared to DC and NS, EC considers not only the number of or correlation strength to immediate neighbor nodes but also their importance. Thus, edges connecting to more important nodes will offer higher centrality in a node than edges connecting to less important nodes. EC measures the strength of a cryptocurrency node with its connections to each major subgroup of the cryptocurrencies. Hence, the cryptocurrency nodes with higher scores are connected to the cryptocurrency nodes having equal connections to low- scoring cryptocurrencies contribute less to the scores of the cryptocurrencies. EC thus computes the centrality for a node based on the centrality of its neighbors. A. Basic Properties of the Cross-return Correlation The cross-return correlation coefficient  reflects the correlation degree of the relative logarithmic return between Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on February 17,2026 at 14:55:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

cryptocurrencies i and j, while the distribution of the cross- return correlation coefficients shows the correlation distribution of the whole cryptocurrency market across the time period we consider. We conduct a time-varying analysis of the cross-return correlation coefficient distribution by its first four moments, namely the mean, the variance, the skewness and the kurtosis. Fig. 2. The mean, variance, skewness and kurtosis of cross-return correlation coefficients of the 120 cryptpcurrencies in the market as a Figure 2 shows the first four moments of the cross-return correlation coefficient distribution over all the 2483 time windows. The numbers below the x-axis are the number of emerged cryptocurrencies from our dataset across different periods of time. In terms of the mean correlation, it exhibits a V-shaped structure in overall. Since the market in early 2013 cryptocurrencies (e.g. BTC, Litecoin  LTC, Ripple  XRP and Dogecoin  DOGE in our dataset) than the number of cryptocurrencies exchanged today, they are generally correlated due to the strong influence of BTC on the others. More specifically, we observe a strong correlation between BTC and LTC (0.76 – 0.86) and a moderate correlation between BTC and XRP (0.35 – 0.5), and between BTC and DOGE (0.45 – 0.6), which keeps the overall mean correlation high in general, even though new cryptocurrencies other than those four mentioned above, which have low to moderate correlation with the others (0.25 to 0.5), are progressively added into the market. This reveals that the early stage of the cryptocurrency market exhibited a medium to strong correlation among the cryptocurrencies. As time goes on, there is a sharp increase in the number of cryptocurrencies in the market since 2014 (66 in 2013 vs. 506 in 2014). There are approximately 6088 cryptocurrencies being traded with a total market capitalization of more than 338 billion USD (as of 05.08.2020) [17]. These cryptocurrencies are created and used for a wide variety of applications, e.g. some are being used for transaction payment, while some are created for blockchain applications in different industries such as healthcare and engineering. As shown by the valley in 2016 in Figure 2, the low mean correlation indicates weak relationship whatsoever between many pairs of cryptocurrencies, e.g. cryptocurrencies that are being used for finance and healthcare may not have any relationship with each other and thus their prices or return are likely to move individually. We observe that, during the valley period, the return correlation of about 80% of all the cryptocurrency pairs are very low, only between 0.0 and 0.2, except for a few pairs such as BTC and LTC. This reveals that the middle stage of the cryptocurrency market exhibited a weak correlation among the cryptocurrencies, possibly due to the emergence of many new cryptocurrencies that are created for a wide range of applications without reciprocal effects from the business and technology perspectives such that they act independently and their returns move individually. Starting from mid-2016, more and more cryptocurrencies are increasingly correlated again. One of the reasons to explain this phenomenon is that, there is a crash in the cryptocurrency market as the price of BTC falls by about 65 percent during the month from 6 January to 6 February 2018 [9]. Subsequently, nearly all other cryptocurrencies also peaked from December 2017 through January 2018, and then followed BTC. By September 2018, cryptocurrencies collapses 80% from their peak in January 2018, making the 2018 cryptocurrency crash worse than the Dot-com bubble's 78% collapse (albeit with a vastly smaller amount of money invested). By 26 November, BTC also falls by over 80% from its peak, having lose almost one-third of its value in the previous week. This increase of the mean correlation value suggests that, during this crash period, all cryptocurrencies are so highly correlated that the entire cryptocurrency market is dragging down as a whole since any financial crisis often cause an increase of the market’s cross-return correlations. In addition to this, the increasing correlation may indicate the increased synchronization among the cryptocurrencies’ prices [5]. More specifically, many cryptocurrencies are becoming mature and are seen in the eyes of the investors as more homogeneous assets, becoming increasingly better substitutes of each other. Thus, their time series properties, i.e. return and volatility, are expected to converge with time and this is confirmed from the study in [10] that the increasing correlation is reflected in an exponentially decreasing number of isolated nodes and the creation of a denser network with growing integration and interconnectedness, in which more cryptocurrencies exhibit similar behavior. Moreover, as the COVID-19 outbreak worsen since early 2020, the price of many cryptocurrencies dropped significantly in two days in mid-March, which further increased the mean correlation value. We conjecture that another reason for the increased correlation is that there are reciprocal effects among the underlying applications of the cryptocurrencies or the use of blockchain technology which is being widely adopted as a solution by various industries. In overall, compared to the past days, the correlation among Therefore, in the same way as the stock market, investors are advised to pay attention to the trends or news of other cryptocurrencies before making any trading decision on a particular one since a few of them remain being the influencers in the market and some are strongly correlated. In terms of the variance, it generally follows the movement of the mean correlation since the correlation between the mean and the variance is very high (~ 0.78). This implies that when the mean correlation increases, possibly due to some negative events in the market or society such as crash (in 2018) and COVID-19 epidemic (since early 2020), the variance increases. Thus, the dispersion of values of the correlation coefficient is higher. In terms of the skewness, it is inverse to the mean correlation as high (low) mean correlation implies Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on February 17,2026 at 14:55:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

that the distribution of the return correlation coefficients becomes more symmetric (asymmetric). In terms of the kurtosis, particularly the spike in 2016, a high degree of kurtosis (i.e. leptokurtic for which the kurtosis values are greater than the normal kurtosis 3) and a long right tail represents a fat-tail distribution that explains the phenomenon of having a very few cryptocurrency pairs with strong correlation (e.g. 0.8 between BTC and LTC), while majority of other pairs have relatively weak correlation (0.1 – 0.35). CORRELATIONS AMONG THE FIRST FOUR MOMENTS USING PEARSONS ‘S LINEAR AND SPEARMAN’S RANK-ORDER (VALUES IN THE Furthermore, we investigate whether these four moments are correlated by calculating their Pearson’s linear and Spearman’s rank-order correlation coefficients in Table I, the values of which between the mean value and the variance are 0.65 and 0.78, while the ones between the skewness and kurtosis are 0.42 and 0.29, respectively. Thus, the first two (i.e. mean and variance) and the last two (i.e. skewness and kurtosis) moments are correlated with each other, as can be observed from their co-movement in the figure. On the contrary, the mean-variance and the skewness-kurtosis are anti-correlated, which can be observed by their opposite co- movement in the figure and negative correlation coefficients in the table (i.e. when one moment increases, the other decreases, and vice versa). B. Dynamic Structure of the Cryptocurrency Network In this section, we investigate the stability of the cryptocurrency network constructed by MST across its evolution. We examine (i) the topological properties of the network, and (ii) the linkage survival in the network. cryptocurrency network, normalized tree length (NTL) is used to measure the average distance of the network at time t [13]: is the distance between cryptocurrency node i and j at time t, Et denotes the set of all edges of the network at time t, and N – 1 is the number of edges. On the other hand, the average path length (APL) can be used to analyze the network density, which is defined as C is the shortest path between nodes i and j in the network at time t. In addition, the mean occupation layer (MOL) proposed by [14] is used to characterize the spread of nodes in the network, which also can be used to quantify the changes in the density of the network, with smaller values suggesting higher density and its nodes tend to crowd the area around the central node in the network. It is defined by are the central node c and node i, respectively, in the network at time t, and C is the difference in level between nodes i and c at time t when the level of the central node c is set to zero. The central node can be either the node with the highest number of links or the highest sum of correlations of its links in the network. For each time window, we choose as the central node the one that minimizes the MOL. It is also noted that one can have either a static (fixed at all times) or a dynamic (continuously updated at each time window) central node. Since the cryptocurrency market is not dominated by only one cryptocurrency, we adopt the dynamic approach in this study. The MOL characterizes the compactness of the network, which usually shrinks during abrupt price changes (e.g. crisis). Fig. 3. Time-varying normalized tree length, average path length and mean occupation layer of the cryptocurrency network Figure 3 shows the time-varying results of NTL in the network. The figure shows that, during the cryptocurrency crash in 2018 and the COVID-19 epidemic in early 2020, the NTL values are obviously at the lowest that forms two valleys. Specifically, low NTL corresponds to a strong correlation across the cryptocurrency market. Similar to stock markets, the cryptocurrency market exhibits the behavior that crisis, either financial, epidemic or others, usually lead to an increase in correlations, which makes the cryptocurrencies more sensitive to changes in market price. Figure 3 also shows the results of APL and MOL. One can see large fluctuations since 2016 and it has the tendency to increase, indicating that the network over time is becoming less compact. We also find that the MOL reaches a lower value on a few occasions, which can be traced to the BTC stolen from Bitfinex in 2016 and crash in 2018 at which BTC prices fall dramatically. An economic interpretation is that during a market crisis, common factors should drive cryptocurrency returns instead of company- and industry- specific factors; therefore, a denser network indicates an increase in the importance of common factors [14]. The low MOL value during the crisis means that the transmission of price fluctuations and other information from the central node to other nodes requires fewer intermediate cryptocurrencies than during more stable periods. In contrast, high MOL values are considered to reflect a finer market structure, whereas in the other extreme low dips are connected to market crashes. This reveals that the network is becoming denser and more concentrated around the central node as well as the co- movement of stocks is reinforced as the market becomes Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on February 17,2026 at 14:55:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

volatile, which is consistent to our subsequent findings about the power-law distribution of the cryptocurrency network. Fig. 4. Single-step and Multi-step survival ratio of the cryptocurrency We next use the single-step survival ratio (SSR) [14] to quantify the edge evolution of the cryptocurrency network: 56 D\ ] \  D where E(t) is the set of edges in the network at time t. The larger the SSR, the more stable the network in a short-time basis. Figure 4 shows the SSR of the network. The figure shows that the SSR trends are similar across the time and its values are very high (the average SSR is 0.95). This indicates that most linkage (on average 95% of the edges in the network) survive from one time to the next and that the network in the short term is stable. To study a longer term evolution of the networks, we use the multi-step survival ratio (MSR) at time t as: 56 D\ ] \   ] _ \  ^ )  ] \  ^D where k is the step length and only the edges that are constantly present in the network after k time steps survive. For small and large k values, MSR(t, k) quantifies the short- erm and long-term network stability, respectively. SSR(t) is simply a special case of MSR(t, 1). We quantify the robustness of the edges by measuring the MSR using different step lengths. We set the step length to be 1, 5 and 10. Figure 4 shows the results from 3 different MSTs. Note that the MST curves show the same trend across different step lengths. Note also that increasing the step length intensifies the MSR curve, suggesting that the edges in the network become less stable over time. For example, when the step length is 5 days, the average MSR is 0.85. If we increase the step length to 10 days, however, the average MSR drops to 0.76, suggesting that 76% linkages in the network is identical over 10 days. This indicates that the cryptocurrency pairs with strong correlations are robust and remain stable across the studied periods. Thus, the trend movement of one cryptocurrency is likely to be influenced by or to influent its counterpart cryptocurrency that is highly correlated with it. Investors are advised to make timely adjustments in their portfolios if they are to minimize risk. C. Scale-Free Structure of the Cryptocurrency Networks So far we have characterized the cryptocurrency network derived from all the elements of the correlation matrix. Since the MST is expected to reflect some aspects of the cryptocurrency market and its state, it is therefore of interest to learn more about its structure. During the last few years, much attention has been devoted to the degree distribution of networks, so called scale-free networks, where this distribution a power-law. Many real networks are found scale- free. If a node i has k edges in a network, then k is designated the degree of node i. The degree distribution p(k) is the probability that a node will have k edges and is also the ratio between the number of nodes with k edges and the total number nodes in a network If the degree distribution p(k) of a network has a power-law tail, i.e., the network is scale-free or has a scale-free structure. To study the scale-free structure of the cryptocurrency networks, we use the analytical methodology proposed by Clauset et al. [18] that combines the maximum-likelihood estimation method of fitting a power-law with the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for Fig. 5. Power law distribution of the cryptocurrency network Figure 5 is a graph of the power-law distribution. Note that when the estimated power law p-value is greater than 0.1, the power-law hypothesis for the empirical data stands. Figure 5 shows that the average power-law exponent  is 1.66 and the corresponding p-values are mostly greater than 0.1. This indicates that the cryptocurrency networks are scale-free networks that follow power-law [18]. The closer the value of the power-law exponent  is to 1.0, the longer the tail of the distribution, and the larger the proportion of the distribution in the tail. Figure 5 shows that this power-law characteristic is also supported by the increasing maximum number of links of the most connected nodes in the networks. D. Centrality Measures Evaluation A node with large centrality may imply that it is important or influential in a network. The cryptocurrency nodes with the highest and the second highest centrality measures based on the MST network construction method are plotted in Figure 6. Cryptocurrency nodes that are not among the two highest centrality are not displayed in the figures to allow for better visualization of the influential cryptocurrencies. In general, these figures have reached similar results from which we can define 3 stages for the evolution of cryptocurrency market as highlighted by the three black dotted line boxes at the top of Figure 6, in which BTC dominates the first stage, followed by MaidSafeCoin (MAID) and Factom (FCT) in the second stage and finally ETH takes the leading position in the third or the most recent stage. Some characteristics of these 3 stages are summarized in Table II. The first stage, from early 2013 to mid-2016, is mainly dominated by cryptocurrencies that are created for financial services. The most influential cryptocurrency is BTC, which Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on February 17,2026 at 14:55:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 6. Cryptocurrencies with the highest (red) and the second highest (green) centrality measures in the cryptocurrency MST networks is primarily being used for transaction payment and mining. Other cryptocurrencies, such as LTC, XRP, XLM, DOGE and BTS, serve similar financial purposes as BTC does. This confirms the findings from [12] that there exists close relationship among BTC, LTC, DOGE, XRP, XLM and BTS A SUMMARY OF 3 STAGES OF THE CRYPTOCURRENCY on their MST networks, with the former three being placed in the middle of the network. The work in [11] also confirms that BTC is the most influential cryptocurrency, followed by LTC which has significant influence on BTC as well as on other leading cryptocurrencies, which suggests that BTC starts losing its dominant role in the evolving cryptocurrency market (BTC’s dominance in market capitalization has gradually faded from 85% in 2010 to 50% today [11]). The work in [10] finds that BTC and LTC are close to each other, and XLM, XRP, BTS and DOGE are within a community in the network. The second stage, from mid-2016 to mid-2017, emphasizes the use of blockchain technology in developing applications, particularly cloud data storage and recording by SC, MAID and FCT which have been identified influential cryptocurrencies with high market capitalization may not always be identified as influential (e.g. SC, MAID and FCT are ranked #71, #78 and #119, respectively in comparison to BTC which is ranked #1). MAID creates a secure through encryption and decentralized data-sharing networks, namely SAFE networks, using unused computer capacities such as disk space. MaidSafe users can become network nodes and receive some coins in rewards for contributing their unused disk space. Afterward, MaidSafe utilizes a vast amount of these unused disk space to offer a decentralized network storage service. Sia serves a similar purpose alike MAID. On the other hand, FCT creates an immutable and decentralized database working on electronic data notarization to enhance data integrity in data recording, e.g. financial, medical and voting data, in its blockchain. In 2016, Factom signed a smart city deal to roll out blockchain verification across China many cities and was working with other countries, e.g. Honduran, to create immutable land registry database. The work in [4] reveals that MAID and FCT are ranked amongst the top 7 by cryptocurrencies, while MAID being the center of the network during the period. The work in [10] find that MAID is one of the largest communities with respect to the number of cryptocurrencies in it, which also includes FCT and SC. Finally, the third stage or the most recent stage since mid- 2017 encourages adopting advanced blockchain features in applications, such as programmable smart contract which is a small computer program that “live” in the blockchain to allow various pre-determined rules of any activities to be encoded into unbreakable contracts and then automates the implementation and execution of these contracts when agreed upon conditions are met. This protects all parties involved, eliminates confusion, and has the potential to dramatically reduce verification, execution and legal costs. ETH is the platform that supports smart contracts in the blockchain environment. Furthermore, Blockchain-As-A-Service (BaaS) is a cloud-based service that allows customers to build their own blockchain-powered products including apps, smart contracts, and use other blockchain features without the need Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on February 17,2026 at 14:55:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

for setup, manage or execute blockchain-based infrastructure. Few companies including Amazon’s AWS, Microsoft’s Azure and others already provide this service. The use of BaaS is expected to increase in 2019 onwards. This further emphasizes the use of Ethereum as the foundation underlying technology for blockchain application development. Other cryptocurrencies, such as ADA, NEO and OMG, are closely related to ETH as can be observed by their strong correlation among each other (0.8 – 0.87). Lastly, we consider closeness and betweenness centrality. The cryptocurrencies listed in Table II are the closest to and being passed through by other nodes in the network during the stages they belong to. Thus, cryptocurrencies among the highest rank in one centrality are likely to be the highest rank in most other centrality measures. E. Cryptocurrency Centrality Measures Under COVID-19 In the previous section, we have identified some influential cryptocurrencies at different stages of the market, with ETH taking the leading position during the recent years. However, we find in Figure 6 (the rightmost part) that, since the outbreak of COVID-19 in early 2020, the most influential cryptocurrencies have been intermittently shifted to QTUM and BNB. First of all, QTUM, a platform that leverages ETH smart contract functionality along with the security of BTC network, has recently published its Q2 2020 report in which their most requested feature of Offline Staking code is released to the community, which allows users to stake their QTUM from mobile, hardware and web wallets [15]. With the new objective of moving a lot of focus to the community, QTUM has also increased its online or social media community engagement, due to COVID-19 and many people staying home because of lockdowns, by hosting many Ask Me Anything sessions, quizzes and key development updates. On the other hand, BNB has recently launched a $5 millions COVID-19 relief champaign “Crypto Against COVID” by donating financial and medical resources to many countries in the world [16]. We believe that these COVID-19 related or aided events would have influential impact in the community, which makes QTUM and BNB important cryptocurrencies that have attracted increasing public attention in recent months (their price movement have exhibited uptrend). As a result, cryptocurrencies that provide relief aids to the COVID-19 pandemic before making any trading decisions as the cryptocurrencies may benefit from the epidemic outbreak. This paper studies the evolution of the cryptocurrency market using network analysis and centrality measures on the time series daily close price of top 120 cryptocurrencies between 2013 and 2020. Our study has two primary findings: cryptocurrencies is weakening from 2013 to 2016 and then strengthening thereafter; (2) cryptocurrencies that are primarily used for transaction payment, notably BTC, dominate the market until mid-2016, followed by those developed for applications using blockchain as the underlying technology, particularly data storage and recording such as MAID and FCT, between mid-2016 and mid-2017. Since cryptocurrencies, such as ADA, NEO and OMG, have replaced BTC to become the benchmark cryptocurrencies, primarily due to its prevailing smart contract capability that can automate the execution of business activities written in the contracts. Furthermore, during the outbreak of COVID-19, QTUM and BNB have intermittently replaced ETH to take the leading positions due to their active community engagement during the pandemic. As future work, we apply network analysis and centrality measures to understand the evolution and characteristics of existing cryptocurrency tokens. The research described in this paper was supported by the Deep Learning and Cognitive Computing Centre (DLC3) at The Hang Seng University of Hong Kong. [1] G. Marti, F. Nielsen, M. Binkowski and P. Donnat, “A review of two decades of correlations, hierarchies, networks and clustering in financial markets,” arXiv: 1703.00485. [2] A. Burnie, “Exploring the Interconnectedness of Cryptocurrencies using Correlation Networks,” Cyrptocurrency Research Conference 2018, Cambridge, United Kingdom. [3] C.J. Frances, P.G. Carles and D.J. Arellano, “The cryptocurrency market: A network analysis,” Esic Market Economics and Business Journal, vol. 49, no. 3, Sept – Dec, 2018, pp. 569-583. [4] S. Yi, Z. Xu and G.J. Wang, “Volatillity connectedless in the cryptocurrency market: Is Bitcoin a dominant cryptocurrency?,” International Review of Financial Analysis, vol. 60, 2018, pp. 98-114. [5] T. Papadimitriou, P. Gogas and F. Gkatzoglou, “The evolution of the Cryptocurrencies Market: A Complex Networks approach,” Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, vol. 376, 2020, Article No. [6] V. Boginski, S. Butenko and P.M. Pardalos, “Statistical analysis of financial networks,” Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, vol. 48, no. 2, 2005, pp. 431-443. [7] R.N. Mantegna, “Hierarchical structure in financial markets,” European Physical Journal B, vol. 11, 1999, pp. 193-197. [8] Centrality, NetworkX Developer, 2020. [Online]. Available: [9] Cryptocurrency bubble, Wikipedia, 2020. [Online]. Available: [10] D. Stosic, S. Stosic, T.B. Ludermir and T. Stosic, “Collective behavior of cryptocurrency price changes,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, vol. 507, 2018, pp. 499-509. [11] J. Qiang, E. Bouri, C.K.M. Lau and D. Roubaud, “Dynamic International Review of Financial Analysis, vol. 63, 2019, pp. 257-272. [12] D. Zieba, R. Kokoszczynski and K. Sledziewska, “Shock transmission in the cryptocurrency market. Is Bitcoin the most influential?,” International Review of Financial Analysis, vol. 64, 2019, pp. 102-125. [13] G.J. Wang, C. Xie, F. Han and B. Sun, “Similarity measure and topology evolution of foreign exchange markets using dynamic time warping method: Evidence from minimal spanning tree,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, vol. 391, no. 16, 2012, pp. [14] J.P. Onnela, A. Chakraborti, K. Kaski, J. Kertesz and A. Kanto, “Dynamics of market correlations: Taxonomy and portfolio analysis,” Physical Review E, vol. 65, no. 5, 056110. [16] Coronavirus Relief: Cryptocurrency Aid Programs Launched to Combat Covid-19 Outbreak, Bitcoin.com, 2020. [Online]. Available: [17] CoinMarketCap. Available: https://www.coinmarketcap.com. [18] A. Clauset, C.R. Shalizi and M.E. Newman, “Power-law distributions in empirical data,” SIAM review, vol. 51, pp. 661-703. [19] D. Jothimani, C. Kavakioglu and A. Basar, “Financial Networks: A Study of the Toronto Stock Exchange,” Proc. IEEE International Conference on Big Data, 2018, pp. 4684-4691. Authorized licensed use limited to: IEEE Xplore. Downloaded on February 17,2026 at 14:55:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

---NEW PAPER---

Citation: Fantazzini, Dean. 2022. Crypto-Coins and Credit Risk: Modelling and Forecasting Their Probability of Death. Journal of Risk and Financial Management 15: 304. Academic Editor: Mario Maggi Received: 13 June 2022 Accepted: 5 July 2022 Published: 11 July 2022 Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁl- © 2022 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https:// Crypto-Coins and Credit Risk: Modelling and Forecasting Their Moscow School of Economics, Moscow State University, Leninskie Gory, 1, Building 61, 119992 Moscow, Russia; fantazzini@mse-msu.ru; Tel.: +7-4955105267; Fax: +7-4955105256 Abstract: This paper examined a set of over two thousand crypto-coins observed between 2015 and 2020 to estimate their credit risk by computing their probability of death. We employed different deﬁnitions of dead coins, ranging from academic literature to professional practice; alternative forecasting models, ranging from credit scoring models to machine learning and time-series-based models; and different forecasting horizons. We found that the choice of the coin-death deﬁnition affected the set of the best forecasting models to compute the probability of death. However, this choice was not critical, and the best models turned out to be the same in most cases. In general, we found that the cauchit and the zero-price-probability (ZPP) based on the random walk or the Markov Switching-GARCH(1,1) were the best models for newly established coins, whereas credit-scoring models and machine-learning methods using lagged trading volumes and online searches were better choices for older coins. These results also held after a set of robustness checks that considered different time samples and the coins’ market capitalization. Keywords: bitcoin; crypto-assets; crypto-currencies; credit risk; default probability; probability of death; ZPP; cauchit; logit; probit; random forests; google trends JEL Classiﬁcation: C32; C35; C51; C53; C58; G12; G17; G32; G33 Crypto-asset research has become a hot topic in the ﬁeld of ﬁnance: for example (and to name just a few), Antonopoulos (2014) describes the technical foundations of bitcoin and other cryptographic currencies, from cryptography basics, such as keys and addresses, to the data structures, network protocols and the consensus mechanism, while Narayanan et al. (2016) provide a comprehensive introduction to digital currencies. Burniske and Tatar (2018) discuss a general framework for investigating and valuing cryptoassets, Brummer (2019) focuses on the legal, regulatory, and monetary issues of the whole crypto ecosystem, Fantazzini (2019) discusses, the instruments needed to analyze cryptocurrencies markets and prices, while Schar and Berentsen (2020) provide a general introduction to cryptocur- rencies and blockchain technology for practitioners and students. The increasing number of traded crypto-assets1 and the repeated cases of hacks, scams, and projects’ failures have made the topic of crypto-asset risk a compelling issue; see Fantazzini and Zimin (2020), and references therein. A cryptocurrency does not have debt and it cannot default in a classical sense2, but its price can crash quickly due to a hack, a scam, or other problems that can make its further development no longer viable. Fantazzini and Zimin (2020) showed that this kind of risk is not a market one and proposed a new deﬁnition of credit risk for crypto-coins based on their “death”, that is, a situation when their price drops signiﬁcantly and a coin becomes illiquid. We remark that there is not a unique deﬁnition for a dead coin, neither in the profes- sional literature3 nor in the academic literature, see Feder et al. (2018), Grobys and Sapkota (2020) and Schmitz and Hoffmann (2020). Moreover, even when a coin is considered dead, it may still show some minimal trading volumes, either due to the possibility to recover J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304. https://doi.org/10.3390/jrfm15070304

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 a small amount of the initial investment, or simply to bet on its possible revamp. In this regard, a coin can be easily revamped by writing new code or simply by updating the previous old code, thus involving much less time and resources than traditional bankrupt ﬁrms; see Sid (2018), for an example. Therefore, the “death” state for a coin may be only a temporary state rather than a permanent one. Despite the presence of thousands of dead coins and a yearly increase in 2021 of more than 30% (Soni (2021)), this topic has been barely examined in the academic literature. Feder et al. (2018) were the ﬁrst to propose a formal deﬁnition of dead coin, while Schmitz and Hoffmann (2020) suggested some simpliﬁed procedures to identify a dead coin for portfolio management. Fantazzini and Zimin (2020) and Grobys and Sapkota (2020) were the ﬁrst (and so far only) to propose models to predict crypto-currency defaults/deaths4. This paper aims to forecast the probability of death of a crypto-coin using different deﬁnitions of dead coins, ranging from the academic literature to professional practice, and different forecasting horizons. To reach the paper’s objective, we ﬁrst employed a set of models to forecast the probability of death, including credit-scoring models, machine- learning models, and time-series methods based on the zero-price-probability (ZPP) model by Fantazzini et al. (2008), which is a methodology to compute the probabilities of default using only market prices. Recent papers by Su and Huang (2010), Li et al. (2016), Dalla Valle et al. (2016), and Fantazzini and Zimin (2020) showed that ZPP models often outperform the competing models in terms of default probability estimation. The second contribution of this paper is a forecasting exercise using a unique set of 2003 crypto-coins that were active from the beginning of 2014 till the end of May of 2020. Our results show that the choice of the coin-death deﬁnition can signiﬁcantly affect the set of the best forecasting models to compute the probability of death. However, this choice is not critical, and the best models turned out to be the same in most cases. In general, we found that the cauchit and the zero-price-probability (ZPP) based on the random walk or the Markov Switching-GARCH(1,1) were the best models for newly established coins, whereas credit-scoring models and machine-learning methods using trading volumes and online searches are better choices for older coins. The third contribution of the paper is a set of robustness checks to verify that our results also hold when considering different time samples and the coins’ market capitalization. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 brieﬂy reviews the literature devoted to the credit risk of crypto-coins, while the methods proposed to model and forecast their probability of death are discussed in Section 3. The empirical results are reported in Section 4, while robustness checks are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 brieﬂy concludes. The ﬁnancial literature dealing with the credit risk involved in crypto-coins is very limited and, at the time of writing this paper, only four papers examined the topic of dead coins, while only two of them proposed methods to forecast the probability of a coin death. We remark that, when investing in a crypto-coin, there are two types of credit risks: the possibility that the coin “dies” and the price goes to zero (or close to zero), and the possibility that the exchange closes, taking most of its investors’ money with it. We focus here on the ﬁrst type of risk, while the latter was examined in Fantazzini and Calabrese (2021), who considered a unique dataset of 144 exchanges, active from the ﬁrst quarter of 2018 to the ﬁrst quarter of 2021, to analyze the determinants surrounding the decision to close an exchange using credit-scoring and machine-learning techniques. Currently, there is not a unique deﬁnition of dead coins, neither in the professional literature, nor in the academic literature: in the professional literature, some deﬁne dead coins as those whose value drops below 1 cent5, yet others stress, on top of that, no trading volume, no nodes running, no active community, and de-listing from (almost) Feder et al. (2018) were the ﬁrst to propose a formal deﬁnition of dead coin in the academic literature: they ﬁrst deﬁne a "candidate peak" as a day in which the seven-day

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 rolling price average is greater than any value 30 days before or after. Moreover, to choose only those peaks with sudden jumps, they deﬁne a candidate as a peak only if it is greater than or equal 50% of the minimum value in the 30 days prior to the candidate peak, and if its value is at least 5% as large as the cryptocurrency’s maximum peak. Given these peak data, Feder et al. (2018) consider a coin abandoned (=dead), if the daily average volume for a given month is less than or equal to 1% of the peak volume. In addition, if the currency is currently considered dead/abandoned but the average daily trading volume for a month following a peak is greater than 10% of the peak value, then Feder et al. (2018) change the coin status to resurrected. Schmitz and Hoffmann (2020) proposed a simpliﬁed version of the previous method by Feder et al. (2018), and they suggested that a crypto-currency can be classiﬁed as dead if its average daily trading volume for a given month is lower or equal to 1% of its past historical peak. Instead, a dead crypto-currencyis classiﬁed as “resurrected” if this average daily trading volume reaches a value of more or equal to 10% of its past historical peak again7. Grobys and Sapkota (2020) and Fantazzini and Zimin (2020) were the ﬁrst (and so far only) to propose models to predict crypto-currency defaults/deaths. Grobys and Sapkota (2020) examined a dataset of 146 proof-of-work-based cryptocurrencies that started trading before 2015 and followed their performance until December 2018, ﬁnding that about 60% of those cryptocurrencies died. They employed a model based on linear discriminant analysis to predict these defaults and found that it could predict most of the crypto-currency bankruptcies, but it struggled to predict functioning crypto-currencies. Predicting well the ﬁrst category and poorly the second one is a well-known problem when using binary classiﬁcation models. For this reason, model selection is usually based on loss functions such as the Brier (1950) score or the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC or AUROC) proposed by Metz (1978), Metz and Kronman (1980), and Hanley and McNeil (1982), instead of using the forecasting accuracy for each binary class8. Another problematic issue with the analysis performed in Grobys and Sapkota (2020) is the need to use several coin-speciﬁc variable candidates that might serve as predictor variables: unfortunately, this kind of information is not available for most dead coins, and Grobys and Sapkota (2020) had to discard several variables to obtain a meaningful dataset. Moreover, considering the large number of scams and frauds regularly taking place among crypto- assets, it is not advisable to take publicly available coin information at face value because it may be false. In addition, Grobys and Sapkota (2020) only performed an in-sample forecasting analysis, and they did not predict crypto-currencies that were not used to estimate their model. Unfortunately, there may be major differences between in-sample and out-of-sample forecasting performances, see Hastie et al. (2009), Giudici and Figini (2009) and Hyndman and Athanasopoulos (2018) for a discussion at the textbook level. Fantazzini and Zimin (2020) proposed a set of models to estimate the probability of death for a group of 42 crypto-currencies using the zero-price-probability (ZPP) model by Fantazzini et al. (2008), which is a methodology to compute the probabilities of default using only market prices, as well as credit-scoring models and machine-learning methods. Their empirical analysis showed that classical credit-scoring models performed better in the training sample, whereas the models’ performances were much closer in the validation sample9, with the simple ZPP computed using a random walk with drift performing remarkably well. The main limitation of the analysis performed by Fantazzini and Zimin (2020) is the very low number of coins used for backtesting (only 42), which can strongly limit the signiﬁcance of their empirical evidence. The past literature and professional practice highlighted that the dead coins collected in well-known online repositories such as coinopsy.com or deadcoins.com are indeed dead, but this fact represents (paradoxically) a problem. Unfortunately, the information set for the vast majority of these coins does not exist anymore because their technical information and historical market data are no longer available. In simple terms, when a coin name is inserted in these repositories, it is too late to gain any valuable information for credit risk modelling and forecasting. It is for this reason that Grobys and Sapkota (2020) and

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Fantazzini and Zimin (2020) were forced to use small coin datasets in their analyses and to employ a limited set of variables to forecast these dead coins. Therefore, it makes more sense to employ the methods proposed by Feder et al. (2018) and Schmitz and Hoffmann (2020) to detect dead coins, or the simple professional rule that deﬁnes a coin as dead if its value drops below 1 cent. Even though there is still some marginal trading for the coins deﬁned as dead according to these rules, this is not a problem but an advantage, because we can analyze them before they go into permanent (digital) oblivion. Another issue that emerged from the literature review is the need to use indicators and methods that are robust to potential frauds and scams. As highlighted by Fantazzini and Zimin (2020), the lack of ﬁnancial oversight for several crypto-based companies and exchanges means that coins’ prices can be subject to manipulations, pump-and-dump schemes and market frauds of various types, see Gandal et al. (2018), Wei (2018), Grifﬁn and Shams (2020), Hamrick et al. (2021), and Gandal et al. (2021) for more details about 3. Materials And Methods We consider three approaches to forecast the probability of death of a large set of crypto-coins: credit-scoring models, machine learning, and time-series methods. A review of the (large) literature on credit-scoring models can be found in Baesens and Van Gestel (2009) and Joseph (2013), while for machine-learning methods in ﬁnance we refer to James et al. (2013), De Prado (2018) and Dixon et al. (2020). Time-series methods based on market prices to compute the probability of default of quoted stocks and small and medium enterprises (SMEs) are discussed in Fantazzini et al. (2008), Su and Huang (2010), Li et al. (2016), Dalla Valle et al. (2016), and Jing et al. (2021), while their use with crypto-coins is explored in Fantazzini (2019) and Fantazzini and Zimin (2020). We ﬁrst brieﬂy review the main aspects of credit risk for cryptocurrencies. Secondly, we discuss a set of credit-scoring and machine-learning models that will be used in the empirical analysis. Then, time-series methods based on the ZPP originally proposed by Fantazzini et al. (2008), as well as new variants, are presented. Fourthly, we review several metrics to evaluate the estimated death probabilities. Finally, we also present the data used in our empirical analysis. 3.1. Credit Risk for Crypto-Coins In traditional ﬁnance, credit risk is deﬁned as the gains and losses on a position or portfolio associated with the fulﬁllment (or not) of contractual obligations, while market risk is the gains and losses on the value of a position or portfolio that can take place due to the movements in market prices (such as exchange rates, commodity prices, interest rates, etc.), see Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009), Hartmann (2010) and references therein for more details. However, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009) highlighted that “the securitization trend in the last decade has diminished the scope for differences in measuring market and credit risk, as securitization transforms the latter into the former” (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009), p. 14). In addition, a large amount of literature showed that market and credit risk are driven by the same economic factors; see the special issue on the interaction of market and credit risk in the Journal of Banking and Finance in 2010 for more details. Fantazzini and Zimin (2020) highlighted that the separation between market and credit risk becomes even more blurred when dealing with crypto-currencies than in traditional ﬁnance. In simple terms, the credit risk for a crypto-coin is its “death”, a situation when its price falls signiﬁcantly and a coin becomes illiquid. More formally, Fantazzini and Zimin (2020) deﬁne the “credit risk for cryptocurrencies as the gains and losses on the value of a position of a cryptocurrency that is abandoned and considered dead according to professional and/or academic criteria, but which can be potentially revived and revamped”. Therefore, it follows that the differences between credit and market risk for crypto- currencies are of quantitative and temporal nature, not qualitative because, if the ﬁnancial

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 losses and the technical problems are small, then we have a market event whereas, if the ﬁnancial losses are too big and the technical problems cannot be solved, then we have a credit event and the crypto-currency “dies” (Fantazzini and Zimin (2020)). In addition, the longer the time horizon is, the more probable are large losses and/or technical problems, so credit risk becomes more important10. Once a credit event takes place, the development of the crypto-coin stops, and its price falls close to zero, or even to zero (if the lack of trading for several days or weeks is considered evidence of a zero price). However, trading may continue afterward for the reasons discussed in the introduction, that is, for the possibility to recover a small amount of the initial investment, or simply to bet on its possible revamp. More speciﬁcally, we employed three competing criteria to classify a coin as dead or alive in our work: The approach by Feder et al. (2018): ﬁrst, a “candidate peak” is deﬁned as a day in which the 7-day rolling price average is greater than any value 30 days before or after. Moreover, to choose only those peaks with sudden jumps, a candidate is deﬁned as a peak only if it is greater than or equal 50% of the minimum value in the 30 days prior to the candidate peak, and if its value is at least 5% as large as the cryptocurrency’s maximum peak. Given these peak data, Feder et al. (2018) consider a coin abandoned (=dead), if the daily average volume for a given month is less than or equal to 1% of the peak volume. In addition, if the average daily trading volume for a month following a peak is greater than 10% of the peak value and that currency is currently abandoned, then Feder et al. (2018) change the coin status to resurrected. The simpliﬁed Feder et al. (2018) approach proposed by Schmitz and Hoffmann (2020): a crypto-currency can be classiﬁed as dead if its average daily trading volume for a given month is lower or equal to 1% of its past historical peak. Instead, a dead crypto-currency is classiﬁed as “resurrected” if this average daily trading volume reaches a value of more or equal to 10% of its past historical peak again. The professional rule that deﬁnes a coin dead if its value drops below 1 cent, and alive if its value rises above 1 cent. 3.2. Credit-Scoring Models and Machine Learning Scoring models merge different variables into a quantitative score, which can be either interpreted as a probability of default (PD), or used as a classiﬁcation system, depending on the model used. In the former case, and considering our framework, a scoring model has the following form: PDi,t+T = P(Di,t+T = 1|Di,t = 0; Xi,t) = F(β′Xi,t) where PDi,t+T is the probability of death for coin i over a period of time t + T, given that it is alive at the time t, and Xi,t is a vector of regressors. If we use the logit model, or the probit model, or the cauchit model, F(β′Xi,t) is given by the logistic, standard normal, standard Cauchy, respectively, cumulative distribution function, The maximum likelihood method is usually used to estimate the parameters vector β in the Equation (1), see McCullagh and Nelder (1989) for more details. The logit and probit models are the widely used benchmarks for credit-risk manage- ment, see Fuertes and Kalotychou (2006), Rodriguez and Rodriguez (2006), Fantazzini and Figini (2008), Fantazzini and Figini (2009), and references therein. The Cauchy distribution has heavier tails than the normal and logistic distributions, thus allowing more extreme

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 values. As discussed in detail by Koenker and Yoon (2009), the cauchit model can be used to model binary responses when observations occur for which the linear predictor is large in absolute value, indicating that the outcome is rather certain but the outcome is different. The cauchit model is more forgiving of these “outliers” than the logit or probit models. In addition, Gündüz and Fokoué (2017) shed some light on the theoretical reasons that explain the similar performance of four binary models (logit, probit, cauchit, and complementary log-log) in univariate settings. However, their simulation studies highlighted that the performance of the four models in high-dimensional spaces tends to depend on the internal structure of the input, with the cauchit being the model of choice under a high level of sparseness of the input space. Machine learning (ML) deals with the development of systems able to recognize complex patterns and make correct choices using a dataset already analyzed. Among the many methods available, we will use the random forest algorithm proposed by Ho (1995) and Breiman (2001), given its excellent past performances in forecasting binary variables, see Hastie et al. (2009), Barboza et al. (2017), Moscatelli et al. (2020), and Fantazzini and Calabrese (2021) for more details. A random forest is an ensemble method consisting of a large number of decision trees, where a decision tree is similar to a reversed tree diagram with branches and leaves, where a choice is made at each step based on the value of a single variable, or a combination of several variables. In case of a classiﬁcation problem, each leaf places an object either in one class or the other. A single decision tree can provide a poor classiﬁcation and suffer from overﬁtting and model instability. Random forests solve these problems by aggregating several decision trees into a so-called “forest”, where each tree is obtained by introducing a random component in their construction. More speciﬁcally, each decision tree in a forest is built using a bootstrap sample from the original data, where 2/3 of these data are used to build a tree, while the remaining 1/3 is used as a control set which is known as out-of-bag (OOB) data. In addition, m variables out of the original n variables are randomly selected at each node of the tree, and the best split based on these m variables is used to split the node. The random selection of variables at each node decreases the correlation among the trees in the forest, so that the algorithm can deal with redundant variables and avoid model overﬁtting. Moreover, each tree is grown up to its maximum size and not pruned to maximize its instability, which is neutralized by the high number of trees created to obtain the “forest”. We remark that, for a given i-th crypto-coin in the OOB control set, the forecasts are computed using a majority vote, which means that the probability of death is given by the proportion of trees voting for the death of coin i. This procedure is repeated for all observations in the control set, which leads to the computation of the overall OOB classiﬁcation error. The zero price probability (ZPP) was originally introduced in Fantazzini et al. (2008) to compute the probabilities of the default of traded stocks using only market prices Pt. This approach computes the market-implied probability P(Pτ ≤0) with t < τ ≤t + T using the fact that, for a traded stock (or a traded coin), the price Pτ is a truncated variable that cannot become less than zero. Therefore, the zero price probability is simply the probability that Pτ goes below the truncation level of zero. Fantazzini et al. (2008) discussed, in detail, why the null price can be used as a default barrier. The general estimation procedure of the ZPP for univariate time series is reported below11: Consider a generic conditional model for the differences in price levels Xt = Pt −Pt−1 Xt = µt + σtzt, zt ∼i.i.d f (0, 1) where µt is the conditional mean, σt is the conditional standard deviation, while zt represents the standardized error.

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Simulate a high number N of price trajectories up to time t + T, using the estimated time-series model (2) at step 1. We will compute the 1-day ahead, 30-day ahead, and 365-day ahead probability of death for each coin, that is T = {1, 30, 365}, respectively. The probability of default/death for a crypto-coin i is simply the ratio n/N, where n is the number of times out of N when the simulated price Pk τ touched or crossed the zero barrier along the simulated trajectory: t < τ ≤t + T The previously cited literature dealing with the ZPP showed that the modelling of the conditional standard deviation σt and the conditional distribution f (·) are the key elements affecting the estimated probability of default/death. We will consider the simple random walk with drift (where σt = σ) and the case where σt follows a GARCH(1,1) with normal errors because both of them allow for closed-form solutions for the ZPP, see Fantazzini and Zimin (2020) for details. We will also consider the case where σt follows a GARCH(1,1) with Student’s t errors, as originally proposed in Fantazzini et al. (2008), and a GARCH(1,1) with errors following the generalized hyperbolic skew-Student distribution proposed by Aas and Haff (2006), which has one tail with polynomial and one with exponential behavior. More recently, Ardia et al. (2019) and Maciel (2021) found that a two-regime Markov-switching GARCH model showed the best in-sample performance when modelling crypto-coin log- returns, and outperformed standard single-regime GARCH models when forecasting the one-day ahead value at risk. Therefore, we will also use this model in our empirical analysis to compute the ZPP for the ﬁrst time using a Markov-Switching model. The main tool to compare the forecasting performances of models with binary data is the confusion matrix by Provost and Kohavi (1998), see Table 1. Table 1. Theoretical confusion matrix. Number of: a true positive, b false positive, c false negative, d In our speciﬁc case, the cells of the confusion matrix have the following meaning: a is the number of correct predictions that a coin is dead, b is the number of incorrect predictions that a coin is dead, c is the number of incorrect predictions that a coin is alive, while d is the number of correct predictions that a coin is alive. The confusion matrix is then used to compute the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC or AUROC) proposed by Metz (1978), Metz and Kronman (1980), and Hanley and McNeil (1982) for all forecasting models. The ROC curve is created by plotting, for any probability cut-off value between 0 and 1, the proportion of correctly predicted dead coins a/(a + b) on the y axis, also known as sensitivity or hit rate, and the proportion of alive coins predicted as dead coins c/(c + d) on the x axis, also known as false-positive rate or as 1–speciﬁcity, where the latter is d/(d + c). The AUC lies between zero and one and the closer it is to one the more accurate the forecasting model is, see Sammut and Webb (2011), pp. 869–75, and references therein for more details. Despite its widespread use, the AUC also has some limitations, as discussed in detail by Krzanowski and Hand (2009), p. 108. Therefore, we also employed the model conﬁdence set (MCS) proposed by Hansen et al. (2011) and extended by Fantazzini and Maggi (2015) to binary models, to select the best forecasting models among a set of competing models with a speciﬁed conﬁdence level. The MCS procedure picks the best forecasting model

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 and computes the probability that the other models are statistically different from the best one using an evaluation rule based on a loss function that, in the case of binary models, is represented by the Brier (1950) score. Brieﬂy, the MCS approach tests, at each iteration, that all models in the set of forecasting models M = M0 have an equal forecasting accuracy using the following null hypothesis for a given conﬁdence level 1 −α, H0,M = E(dij) = 0, HA,M = E(dij) ̸= 0 where dij = Li −Lj is the sample loss differential between forecasting models i and j and Li stands for the loss function of model i (in our case, the Brier score). If the null hypothesis cannot be rejected, then b 1−α = M. If the null hypothesis is rejected, an elimination rule is used to remove the worst forecasting models from the set M. The procedure is repeated until the null hypothesis cannot be rejected, and the ﬁnal set of models deﬁnes the so-called 1−α. We will employ the T-max statistic for the equivalence test in the MCS procedure. A brief description of this test is reported below, while we refer to Hansen et al. (2011), for more details. First, the following t-statistics are computed, ti· = di·/ c var(di·), for i ∈M, where di· = m−1 ∑j∈M ¯dij is the simple loss of the ith model relative to the average losses across models in the set M, and dij = H−1 ∑H the sample loss differential between model i and j, and H is the number of forecasts. The T-max statistic is then calculated as Tmax = maxi∈M(ti·). This statistic has a non-standard distribution that is estimated using bootstrapping methods with 1000 replications. If the null hypothesis is rejected, one model is eliminated using the following elimination rule: emax,M = arg maxi∈M We collected the data examined in this paper using two sources of information: https://coinmarketcap.com, accessed on 1 June 2022: CoinMarketCap is the main aggregator of crypto-coin market data, and it has been owned by the crypto-exchange Binance since April 2020, see https://crypto.marketswiki.com/index.php?title=Coi nMarketCap, accessed on 1 June 2022. It provides open-high-low-close price data, volume data, market capitalization, and a wide range of additional information. Google Trends: the Search Volume Index provided by Google Trends shows how many searches have been performed for a keyword or a topic on Google over a speciﬁc period and a speciﬁc region. See https://support.google.com/trends/?hl=en, (accessed on 1 June 2022) for more details. The dataset consisted of 2003 crypto-coins that were alive or dead (according to differ- ent criteria) between January 2014 and May 2020. When collecting coin data, we noticed the presence of coins with short time series and coins with long time series. Therefore, we decided to separate coins with fewer than 750 observations (young coins) from the coins with more than 750 observations (old coins): we chose this type of grouping because we used the ﬁrst set of coins to forecast the 1-day and 30-day ahead probabilities of death, while the sec- ond set to forecast the 1-day, 30-day, and 365-day ahead probabilities of death, respectively. The effects of different types of groupings are presented in the robustness checks. As discussed in detail in Section 3.1, we employed three competing criteria to classify a coin as dead or alive: The approach proposed by Feder et al. (2018); The approach proposed by Schmitz and Hoffmann (2020); The professional rule that deﬁnes a coin dead if its value drops below 1 cent, and alive if its value rises above 1 cent. The total number of “dead days”, that is, the total number of days when the coins are deemed as “dead” according to the previous criteria, is reported in Table 2, both in absolute

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Table 2. Number of dead days (in absolute value and %) for different criteria used to classify a coin as dead or alive. Feder et al. (2018) Simpliﬁed Feder et al. (2018) Feder et al. (2018) Simpliﬁed Feder et al. (2018) As expected, the Feder et al. (2018) approach is the most restrictive with fewer identi- ﬁed dead coins, while the professional rule that deﬁnes a coin dead if its value drops below 1 cent is laxer, allowing for a much larger number of dead coins. The simpliﬁed Feder et al. (2018) approach proposed by Schmitz and Hoffmann (2020) stays in the middle between the previous two approaches in the case of young coins, whereas it is the least restrictive in the case of old coins12. The total number of coins available each day, and the total number of dead coins each day computed using the previous three criteria and the price and volume data from https://coinmarketcap.com, (accessed on 1 June 2022) are reported in Figure 1. The Feder et al. (2018) approach appears to be more stable than the other two methods, which show much more volatile numbers, instead. The dataset of young coins ranges between August 2015 and May 2020, while the dataset of old coins ranges between January 2014 and May 2020. Following Fantazzini and Zimin (2020), in the case of young coins, we used the lagged average monthly trading volume and the lagged average monthly search volume index provided by Google Trends as regressors for the logit, probit, cauchit, and random forest models. We computed direct forecasts, so we used the 1-day lagged regressors to forecast the 1-day ahead probability of death, while the 30-day lagged regressors to forecast the 30-day ahead probability of death. In the case of old coins, we also added the lagged average yearly trading volume and the lagged average yearly search volume index, and we used the 365-day lagged regressors to forecast the 365-day ahead probability of death. The ﬁrst initialization sample used for the estimation of credit-scoring and ML models was August 2015–December 2018 for the young coins, and January 2014–December 2015 for the old coins. These time samples were chosen so that the ﬁrst estimation windows had approximately 100.000 observations13. In simple terms, all coin data were pooled together up to time t (for example), and the credit-scoring and ML models were then ﬁtted to this dataset and the required forecasted probabilities of deaths were computed. After that, the time window was increased by 1 day, and the previous procedure was repeated. A schematic example of a pooled coin dataset used for credit-scoring and ML models is reported in Table 3.

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Figure 1. Daily number of total available coins, and the daily number of dead coins computed using the previous three criteria and the price and volume data from https://coinmarketcap.com, accessed on 1 June 2022. To deal with potential structural breaks, we considered two types of estimation windows: a rolling fixed window of 100.000 observations and the traditional expanding window. Time-series models using the ZPP were instead estimated separately for each coin. Given that the time series of historical market prices were relatively short (particularly for young coins), we employed only an expanding window scheme with the ﬁrst estimation sample consisting of 30 observations14.

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Table 3. Schematic example of a pooled coin dataset used for credit-scoring and ML models. We computed the probability of death for the following two sets of coins: A total of 1165 young coins for a total of 537,693 observations, whose names are reported in Tables A1–A3 in Appendix A. We used this set of coins to forecast the 1-day and 30-day ahead probabilities of death. A total of 838 old coins for a total of 987,018 observations, whose names are reported in Tables A4 and A5 in Appendix A. We used this set of coins to forecast the 1-day, 30-day, and 365-day ahead probabilities of death. For the sake of space and interest, given the very large dataset at our disposal, we focused exclusively on out-of-sample forecasting, whereas the in-sample analysis dealing with the models’ residuals was not considered15. We computed direct forecasts for the credit-scoring and ML models so, at a given time t, we estimated these models as many times as the number of forecast horizons and with regressors lagged as many days as the length of the forecast horizons (1-day lagged regressors to forecast the 1-day ahead probability of death, and so on). Instead, the time- series models using the ZPP were estimated only once, and the probabilities of deaths for different forecast horizons were computed using recursive forecasts16. The AUC scores, the Brier scores, the models included in the model conﬁdence set (MCS), and how many times (in %) the models did not reach numerical convergence, across the three competing criteria to classify a coin as dead or alive, are reported in Table 4 for the young coins, and in Table 5 for the old coins.

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Table 4. Young coins: AUC scores (highest values are in bold fonts), Brier scores (smallest values are in bold fonts), models included in the MCS, and numerical- convergence failures in percentage across three competing criteria to classify a coin as dead or alive. Feder et al. (2018) approach = “restrictive”; simpliﬁed Feder et al. (2018) approach = “simple”; professional rule = “1 cent”. Young coins: 1-day ahead probability of death Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1) Young coins: 30-day ahead probability of death Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1)

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Table 5. Old coins: AUC scores (highest values are in bold fonts), Brier scores (smallest values are in bold fonts), models included in the MCS, and numerical convergence failures in percentage across three competing criteria to classify a coin as dead or alive. Feder et al. (2018) approach = “restrictive”; simpliﬁed Feder et al. (2018) approach = “simple”; professional rule = “1 cent”. Old coins: 1-day ahead probability of death Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1) Old coins: 30-day ahead probability of death Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1)

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Old coins: 365-day ahead probability of death Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1)

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 The forecasting metrics for the young coins show that the cauchit model with a ﬁxed estimation window of 100,000 observations is generally the best model for all forecast horizons considered and across most criteria to classify a coin as dead or alive. This result conﬁrms the simulation evidence reported in Gündüz and Fokoué (2017), who showed that the cauchit is the model of choice under a high level of sparseness of the input space: this is deﬁnitely the case for the dataset of young coins, whose trading volumes and Google searches are mostly very low and close to zero. However, we remark that the ZPP computed using a MS-GARCH(1,1) model is the best model when using the professional rule that deﬁnes a coin dead if its value drops below 1 cent, thus indirectly conﬁrming the good empirical performances reported in Ardia et al. (2019) and Maciel (2021). Similarly, according to the AUCs, the ZPP computed using the simple random walk provides good forecasts across all horizons and classifying criteria, which is in-line with all the past literature dealing with the ZPP. In the case of old coins, the random forests model with an expanding estimation window is the best model for forecasting the probability of death up to 30 days ahead. Instead, credit-scoring models and the ZPP models computed with the random walk and the MS-GARCH(1,1) are the best for the 365-day ahead horizon, according to loss functions and AUCs, respectively. The latter horizon is arguably the most important for credit-risk management purposes, because this is the time interval that is usually considered by national rules and international agreements, such as the Basel 2 and Basel 3 agreements. In general, our empirical evidence shows that ZPP-based models tend to show better AUCs for long-term forecasts of the probability of death, whereas credit-scoring and ML models have better loss functions. This result was expected because the latter models tend to provide smoothed forecasts by construction, while this is not the case for time- series-based models. An important advantage of credit-scoring and ML models is the greater ease of estimation than the other models. The ZPP computed with the random walk model share the same numerical efﬁciency, whereas the GARCH(1,1) with errors following the generalized hyperbolic skew-Student distribution had (by far) the worst numerical performance across all datasets: this was not a surprise given that the high complexity of this model is poorly suited for (extremely) noisy data such as crypto-coins data. Given that ZPP-based models seem to better distinguish between future dead and alive coins, while credit-scoring and ML models provide smaller loss functions, this evidence strongly suggests the possibility of forecasting gains using forecast combinations methods. We leave this topic as an avenue for future research. The intuition behind these results is that the additional information provided by trading volumes and Google searches does indeed help to improve the forecasting of the probabilities of deaths, particularly for short-term horizons. We also tried to add these regressors to time-series-based models, but the estimation of the models turned out to be either poor or not viable due to the short time series available for estimation, and for this reason, we did not consider such models17. It is well-known, since the work by Fiorentini et al. (1996), that the estimation of GARCH models is complex and requires large samples. Moreover, the large simulation studies of GARCH processes in Hwang and Valls Pereira (2006), Fantazzini (2009) and Bianchi et al. (2011) showed that a sample of at least 250–500 observations is needed to have good model estimates and, in case of complex data-generating processes, even larger samples are required. We wanted to verify that our previous results also held with different data samples. Therefore, we performed a series of robustness checks considering the models’ forecasting performances before and after the burst of the bitcoin bubble at the end of 2017, and when separating crypto-coins with large market capitalization from coins with small market

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 5.1. Forecasting the Probability of Death before and after the 2017 Bubble There is increasing literature showing that there was a ﬁnancial bubble in bitcoin prices in 2016-2017 that burst at the end of 2017, see Fry (2018), Corbet et al. (2018), Gerlach et al. (2019), and Xiong et al. (2020). In addition, there is also a debate on whether the introduction of bitcoin futures in December 2017 crashed the market prices, see Köchling et al. (2019), Liu et al. (2020), Baig et al. (2020), Jalan et al. (2021), and Hattori and Ishida (2021). Fantazzini and Kolodin (2020) used several unit root tests allowing for an endogenous break and found a signiﬁcant structural break located at the end of 2017, so they ﬁxed a break date on 10 December 2017, which is the day when the ﬁrst bitcoin futures were introduced on Following this literature, we divided our dataset into two sub-samples consisting of data before and after 10 December 2017, and we examined the models’ forecasting performances in these two sub-samples. Given the very small number of young coins available before the end of 2017, we only considered old coins for this robustness check (that is, coins with at least 750 observations). The AUC scores, the Brier scores, and the models included in the model conﬁdence set (MCS) across the three competing criteria to classify a coin as dead or alive are reported in Table 6 for the sub-sample ending on 10 December 2017, and in Table 7 for the sub-sample starting after that date. Tables 6 and 7 do not highlight any major differences between the two sub-samples. However, we can notice that the general levels of the AUCs for the 30-day and 365-days forecast horizons slightly decreased in the second sub-sample after the burst of the 2017 bubble. Moreover, in the latter sub-sample, credit-scoring models (particularly the cauchit) showed better results compared to the random forest and ZPP models than in the ﬁrst sub-sample, that is, before the bubble burst. Probably, the fall in trading volumes and Google searches after 2017 increased the sparseness of the input space, thus favoring models such as the cauchit, as shown by Gündüz and Fokoué (2017) and discussed in the

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Table 6. Old coins: years 2016–2017. AUC scores (highest values are in bold fonts), Brier scores (smallest values are in bold fonts), and models included in the MCS across three competing criteria to classify a coin as dead or alive. Feder et al. (2018) approach = “restrictive”; simpliﬁed Feder et al. (2018) approach = “simple”; professional rule = “1 cent”. Old coins: 1-day ahead probability of death (2016 –2017) Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1) Old coins: 30-day ahead probability of death (2016–2017) Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1)

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Old coins: 365-day ahead probability of death (2016–2017) Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1) Table 7. Old coins: years 2018–2020. AUC scores (highest values are in bold fonts), Brier scores (smallest values are in bold fonts), and models included in the MCS across three competing criteria to classify a coin as dead or alive. Feder et al. (2018) approach = “restrictive”; simpliﬁed Feder et al. (2018) approach = “simple”; professional rule = “1 cent”. Old coins: 1-day ahead probability of death (2018 –2020) Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1)

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Old coins: 1-day ahead probability of death (2018 –2020) Old coins: 30-day ahead probability of death (2018–2020) Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1) Old coins: 365-day ahead probability of death (2018–2020) Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1)

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 5.2. Large Cap and Small Cap: Does It Matter? In the baseline case, we separated our coins data based on the length of their time series for forecasting purposes. Moreover, before starting our analysis, we tried different clustering methods to group coins with similar attributes, and most methods proposed groupings quite close to our simple baseline approach18. However, we also noticed that some methods separated the 50–100 coins with the largest market capitalizations from all others. Therefore, we separated the 100 crypto-coins with the largest market capitalization from all other coins with a smaller market capitalization, and we examined how the models’ The AUC scores, the Brier scores, and the models included in the model conﬁdence set (MCS) across the three competing criteria to classify a coin as dead or alive are reported in Table 8 for the 100 coins with the largest market capitalization, and in Table 9 for all Tables 8 and 9 show that the separation of coins based on their market capitalization did not produce any major changes compared to the baseline case. However, there are some differences: in the case of big-cap coins, the random forests model remained the best model only for 1-day ahead forecasts, whereas the cauchit was the best model for both the 30-day and 365-day ahead forecast horizons. A similar picture also emerged for small-cap coins, where credit-scoring models and the ZPP computed with the MS-GARCH(1,1) were the best models for the 30-day and 365-day ahead forecast horizons. Interestingly, the success of credit-scoring and ZPP-based models for the long-term forecasts of the probability of death of small-cap coins are qualitatively similar to the evidence reported by Fantazzini and Zimin (2020), who used only 42 coins (most of them small cap).

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Table 8. Big-cap coins: AUC scores (highest values are in bold fonts), Brier scores (smallest values are in bold fonts), and models included in the MCS across three competing criteria to classify a coin as dead or alive. Feder et al. (2018) approach = “restrictive”; simpliﬁed Feder et al. (2018) approach = “simple”; professional rule = “1 cent”. Big-cap coins: 1-day ahead probability of death Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1) Big-cap coins: 30-day ahead probability of death Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1)

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Big-cap coins: 365-day ahead probability of death Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1) Table 9. Small-cap coins: AUC scores (highest values are in bold fonts), Brier scores (smallest values are in bold fonts), and models included in the MCS across three competing criteria to classify a coin as dead or alive. Feder et al. (2018) approach = “restrictive”; simplified Feder et al. (2018) approach = “simple”; professional rule = “1 cent”. Small-cap coins: 1-day ahead probability of death Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1)

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Small-cap coins: 30-day ahead probability of death Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1) Small-cap coins: 365-day ahead probability of death Random Forest (expanding window) Random Forest (ﬁxed window) ZPP - Random walk ZPP - Normal GARCH(1,1) ZPP - Student’st GARCH(1,1) ZPP - GH Skew-Student GARCH(1,1)

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 This paper examined a set of over two thousand crypto-coins observed between 2015 and 2020, to estimate their credit risk by computing their probability of death using different deﬁnitions of dead coins, and different forecasting horizons. To achieve this aim, we ﬁrst employed a set of models to forecast the probability of death including credit-scoring models, machine-learning models, and time-series methods based on the zero-price-probability (ZPP) model, which is a methodology to compute the probabilities of default using only market prices. Secondly, we performed a forecasting exercise using a unique set of 2003 crypto-coins that were active from the beginning of 2014 till the end of May 2020. Our results showed that the choice of the coin-death deﬁnition signiﬁcantly affected the set of the best forecasting models to compute the probability of death. However, this choice was not critical, and the best models turned out to be the same in most cases. In general, we found that the cauchit and the ZPP based on the random walk or the MS-GARCH(1,1) were the best models for newly established coins, whereas credit-scoring models and machine-learning methods using lagged trading volumes and online searches were better choices for older coins. Finally, we performed a set of robustness checks to verify that our results also held with different data samples. To achieve this aim, we considered the models’ forecasting performances before and after the burst of the bitcoin bubble at the end of 2017, and when we separated crypto-coins with large market capitalization from coins with small market capitalization. The two robustness checks did not produce any major changes compared to The general recommendation for investors that emerged from our analysis is to use the cauchit model when dealing with coins with a short time series and/or with trading volumes and Google searches close to zero. In the case of a large information set and the main interest is on short-term forecasting, the random forests model is deﬁnitely the model of choice, whereas the ZPP-based models using the simple random walk or the MS-GARCH(1,1) are to be preferred in case of long-term forecasts up to 1-year ahead. Another implication of the findings of our work is the need to have more transparency and better reporting about the credit risk of crypto-assets. Given the large losses incurred by investors in previous years, the lack of focus on risk-management practices is somewhat astonishing. One of the best practices that this work clearly suggests is for crypto-exchanges to publish the estimated probability of death for the traded crypto-assets daily, using one of the models discussed in this paper, or the simple average of the estimates provided by several models. The reported probabilities of death would warn investors about the risk of investing in crypto-assets, thus helping them making more considered investment decisions. We should note that our empirical analysis highlighted that the major drawback of the ZPPs computed using GARCH models is the need to have time series long enough to obtain decent parameter estimates. This problem makes them unsuitable for newly established coins. Moreover, the extreme volatility of crypto-coin markets and the frequent presence of structural breaks make things worse. Therefore, it was not a surprise that the ZPPs calculated using the simple random walk or the Markov-Switching GARCH(1,1) model were the best in this class of models. The retrieval of high-frequency data and the use of Bayesian methods to solve these computational issues are left as avenues for Another possibility of future work will be to explore the feasibility of forecast combi- nations methods. Given that ZPP-based models seem to better distinguish between future dead and alive coins, while credit-scoring and ML models provide smaller loss functions, our empirical evidence suggests the possibility of forecasting gains using combinations methods. This is why this extension could be an interesting issue for future research. Funding: The author gratefully acknowledges ﬁnancial support from the grant of the Russian Science Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Appendix A. Lists of Young and Old Coins Table A1. Names of the 1165 young coins: coins 1–400. 304 Electronic Energy Coin 205 Content Value Network 309 Digital Asset Guarantee Token 212 Sport and Leisure 313 Pundi X NEM 221 Diamond Platform Token The Midas Touch Gold 322 Global Social Chain 328 Trade Token X Metaverse Dualchain Network Architecture 142 General Attention Currency 247 Digix Gold Token 249 Darico Ecosystem Coin 253 Atomic Wallet Coin 154 Machine Xchange Coin 164 The Force Protocol 364 Content Neutrality Network 371 Spectre.ai Utility Token

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 189 Invictus Hyperion Fund 398 Credit Tag Chain 400 RSK Smart Bitcoin Table A2. Names of the 1165 young coins: coins 401–800. 703 W Green Pay 704 Digital Insurance Token 508 Fast Access Blockchain 710 MTC Mesh Network 412 Naka Bodhi Token 715 Global Awards Token 721 ALL BEST ICO 722 wave edu coin 629 Coinsuper Ecosystem Network 541 Business Credit Substitute 442 Blue Whale EXchange 644 Max Property Group 451 Bitex Global XBX Coin 751 FSBT API Token 452 Colu Local Network

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 557 Gold Bits Coin 560 Lisk Machine Learning 461 Quanta Utility Token 762 Blockparty (BOXX Token) 468 Iconiq Lab Token 469 Blockchain Certiﬁed Data Token 569 Gene Source Code Chain 669 Master Contract Token 571 ICE ROCK MINING 773 Carboneum [C8] Token 678 Q DAO Governance token v1.0 778 Hyper Speed Network 785 Decentralized Machine Learning 494 Vision Industry Token 595 Bitcoin Free Cash 798 Business Credit Alliance Chain Table A3. Names of the 1165 young coins: coins 801–1165. 801 Mainstream For The Underground 911 No BS Crypto 1012 Zenswap Network Token 1112 Kora Network Token 1115 Helper Search Token 817 The Currency Analytics 918 Mobile Crypto Pay Coin 922 Kind Ads Token 1025 Global Crypto Alliance 1026 Level Up Coin 1128 Decentralized Crypto Token

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 1041 Cyber Movie Chain 1141 Secrets of Zurich 947 Japan Content Token 1051 Save Environment Token 1052 Magic Cube Coin 856 Ethereum Gold Project 1161 Newton Coin Project 1164 Bitpanda Ecosystem Token 968 Data Transaction Token 1068 P2P Global Network 1079 Natmin Pure Escrow 895 Guaranteed Ethurance Token Extra 897 Social Activity Token 998 Ether Kingdoms Token

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Table A4. Names of the 838 old coins: coins 1–420. 215 Quantum Resistant Ledger 320 Red Pulse Phoenix 321 Blockmason Credit Protocol 219 United Traders Token 226 SIRIN LABS Token 123 Acute Angle Cloud 127 Dynamic Trading Rights 245 High Performance Blockchain 158 Raiden Network Token 161 Spectre.ai Dividend Token 174 Time New Bank 282 Matrix AI Network 389 Restart Energy MWAT 181 Moeda Loyalty Points 183 Santiment Network Token

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 294 Hi Mutual Society 298 Measurable Data Token Table A5. Names of the 838 old coins: coins 421–838. 528 Waves Community Token 425 IHT Real Estate Protocol 532 Internet of People 753 Digital Money Bits 545 Trinity Network Credit 755 Theresa May Coin 667 Proﬁle Utility Token 570 Memetic / PepeCoin 780 Open Trading Network

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 681 Global Currency Reserve 792 Independent Money System 594 Ultimate Secure Cash 821 Wild Beast Block 718 Advanced Technology Coin 828 Save and Gain At the end of December 2021, almost 15,000 crypto-assets were listed on Coinmarketcap.com, accessed on 1 June 2022. CoinMar- ketCap is the main aggregator of cryptocurrency market data, and it has been owned by the crypto-exchange Binance since April 2020; see https://crypto.marketswiki.com/index.php?title=CoinMarketCap, accessed on 1 June 2022 for more details. Lansky (2018), p. 19, formally deﬁned a crypto-currency as a system that satisﬁes these six conditions: “(1) The system does not require a central authority, its state is maintained through distributed consensus. (2) The system keeps an overview of cryptocurrency units and their ownership. (3) The system deﬁnes whether new cryptocurrency units can be created. If new cryptocurrency units can be created, the system deﬁnes the circumstances of their origin and how to determine the ownership of these new units. (4) Ownership of cryptocurrency units can be proved exclusively cryptographically. (5) The system allows transactions to be performed in which ownership of the cryptographic units is changed. A transaction statement can only be issued by an entity proving the current ownership of these units. (6) If two different instructions for changing the ownership of the same cryptographic units are simultaneously entered, the system performs at most one of them.” https://www.investopedia.com/news/crypto-carnage-over-800-cryptocurrencies-are-dead/, accessed on 1 June 2022; https: //www.coinopsy.com/dead-coins/, accessed on 1 June 2022. We will use the terms “probability of death” and “probability of default” interchangeably. https://www.investopedia.com/news/crypto-carnage-over-800-cryptocurrencies-are-dead/, accessed on 1 June 2022. https://www.coinopsy.com/dead-coins/, accessed on 1 June 2022.

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Note that Schmitz and Hoffmann (2020) presented this method as the Feder et al. (2018) approach when, in reality, the latter involves many more restrictions. The methodology used by Schmitz and Hoffmann (2020) in their empirical analysis is even more simpliﬁed, and it assumes that a coin is (temporarily) inactive if data gaps are present in its time series. See Section 5 in Giudici and Figini (2009) for a review. In-sample analysis is also known as training, while the out-of-sample analysis can be named as validation. Note that this result is already known in the traditional ﬁnancial literature because “the ratio of default and (normally distributed) market risk losses is proportional to the square-root of the holding period. Since the ratio goes to 0 as the holding period goes to 0, over short horizons market risk is relatively more important, while over longer horizons losses due to default become more important”(Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009), pp. 16–17). Fantazzini and Zimin (2020) proposed a multivariate approach to compute the ZPP of 42 coins. Given the very large dataset at our disposal, such an approach is not feasible in our case due to the curse of dimensionality. An extension of this methodology to large portfolios is left as an avenue for further research. For ease of reference, we will refer to the Feder et al. (2018) approach as “restrictive”, to the simpliﬁed Feder et al. (2018) approach as “simple”, while to the professional rule as “1 cent”. The experience of the author (both in academia and in the professional ﬁeld) with credit-risk management for SMEs and with potentially noisy and fraudulent data suggested a minimum dataset of 50.000–100.000 data to have robust estimates. We remark that the datasets used for the estimation of credit scoring, ML models and time series-based models were different, so there were dates for which forecasts from all models were not available. This situation had no impact on individual metrics such as the AUC, but it affected the computation of the model conﬁdence set using the Brier score: in the latter case, we used only dates where forecasts from all models were available. The author wants to thank three anonymous professionals working in the crypto-industry for pointing his work in this direction. The development of ZPP models allowing for direct forecasts is left as an avenue for further research. We also tried to add these regressors in the mean equation of the simple random walk model, but the results did not change qualitatively (results not reported). This was not a surprise because it is the variance modelling that is the key ingredient when computing the ZPP, see Fantazzini and Zimin (2020)—Section 4.3—and references therein for more details. See Romesburg (2004) and Everitt (2011) for an introduction to cluster analysis at the textbook level. Aas, Kjersti, and Ingrid Hobæk Haff. 2006. The generalized hyperbolic skew student’st-distribution. Journal of Financial Econometrics 4: Antonopoulos, Andreas. 2014. Mastering Bitcoin: Unlocking Digital Cryptocurrencies. Sebastopol: O’Reilly Media, Inc. Ardia, David, Keven Bluteau, and Maxime Rüede. 2019. Regime changes in Bitcoin GARCH volatility dynamics. Finance Research Letters 29: 266–71. [CrossRef] Baesens, Bart, and Tony Van Gestel. 2009. Credit Risk Management: Basic Concepts. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Baig, Ahmed S., Omair Haroon, and Nasim Sabah. 2020. Price clustering after the introduction of bitcoin futures. Applied Finance Letters 9: 36–42. [CrossRef] Barboza, Flavio, Herbert Kimura, and Edward Altman. 2017. Machine learning models and bankruptcy prediction. Expert Systems with Applications 83: 405–17. [CrossRef] Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 2009. Findings on the Interaction of Market and Credit Risk. Technical Report, BCBS Working Papers, n. 16., Basel, Switzerland. Available online: https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs_wp16.pdf (accessed on 1 June 2022). Bianchi, Carluccio, Maria Elena De Giuli, Dean Fantazzini, and Mario Maggi. 2011. Small sample properties of copula-GARCH modelling: A Monte Carlo study. Applied Financial Economics 21: 1587–97. [CrossRef] Breiman, Leo. 2001. Random forests. Machine Learning 45: 5–32. [CrossRef] Brier, Glenn. 1950. Veriﬁcation of forecasts expressed in terms of probability. Monthly Weather Review 78: 1–3. [CrossRef] Brummer, Chris. 2019. Cryptoassets: Legal, Regulatory, and Monetary Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Burniske, Chris, and Jack Tatar. 2018. Cryptoassets: The Innovative Investor’s Guide to Bitcoin and Beyond. New York: McGraw-Hill. Corbet, Shaen, Brian Lucey, and Larisa Yarovaya. 2018. Datestamping the bitcoin and ethereum bubbles. Letters 26: 81–88. [CrossRef] Dalla Valle, Luciana, Maria Elena De Giuli, Claudia Tarantola, and Claudio Manelli. 2016. Default probability estimation via pair copula constructions. European Journal of Operational Research 249: 298–311. [CrossRef] De Prado, Marcos Lopez. 2018. Advances in Financial Machine Learning. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons. Dixon, Matthew F., Igor Halperin, and Paul Bilokon. 2020. Machine Learning in Finance. New York: Springer. Everitt, Brian. 2011. Cluster Analysis. Chichester: Wiley. Fantazzini, Dean. 2009. The effects of misspeciﬁed marginals and copulas on computing the Value-at-Risk: A Monte Carlo study. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 53: 2168–88. Fantazzini, Dean. 2019. Quantitative Finance with R and Cryptocurrencies. Seattle: Amazon KDP, ISBN-13: 978–1090685315.

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Fantazzini, Dean, and Raffaella Calabrese. 2021. Crypto Exchanges and Credit Risk: Modeling and Forecasting the Probability of Closure. Journal of Risk and Financial Management 14: 516. [CrossRef] Fantazzini, Dean, Maria Elena De Giuli, and Mario Alessandro Maggi. 2008. A new approach for ﬁrm value and default probability estimation beyond merton models. Computational Economics 31: 161–80. Fantazzini, Dean, and Silvia Figini. 2008. Default forecasting for small-medium enterprises: Does heterogeneity matter? International Journal of Risk Assessment and Management 11: 138–63. [CrossRef] Fantazzini, Dean, and Silvia Figini. 2009. Random survival forests models for sme credit risk measurement. Methodology and Computing in Applied Probability 11: 29–45. [CrossRef] Fantazzini, Dean, and Nikita Kolodin. 2020. Does the hashrate affect the bitcoin price? Journal of Risk and Financial Management 13: 263. Fantazzini, Dean, and Mario Maggi. 2015. Proposed coal power plants and coal-to-liquids plants in the us: Which ones survive and why? Energy Strategy Reviews 7: 9–17. [CrossRef] Fantazzini, Dean, and Stephan Zimin. 2020. A multivariate approach for the simultaneous modelling of market risk and credit risk for cryptocurrencies. Journal of Industrial and Business Economics 47: 19–69. [CrossRef] Feder, Amir, Neil Gandal, James Hamrick, Tyler Moore, and Marie Vasek. 2018. The rise and fall of cryptocurrencies. Paper presented at 17th Workshop on the Economics of Information Security (WEIS), Innsbruck, Austria, June 18–19. Fiorentini, Gabriele, Giorgio Calzolari, and Lorenzo Panattoni. 1996. Analytic derivatives and the computation of GARCH estimates. Journal of Applied Econometrics 11: 399–417. [CrossRef] Fry, John. 2018. Booms, busts and heavy-tails: The story of bitcoin and cryptocurrency markets? Economics Letters 171: 225–29. Fuertes, Ana-Maria, and Elena Kalotychou. 2006. Early warning systems for sovereign debt crises: The role of heterogeneity. Computational Statistics and Data Analysis 51: 1420–41. [CrossRef] Gandal, Neil, James Hamrick, Tyler Moore, and Tali Oberman. 2018. Price manipulation in the Bitcoin ecosystem. Journal of Monetary Economics 95: 86–96. [CrossRef] Gandal, Neil, James Hamrick, Tyler Moore, and Marie Vasek. 2021. The rise and fall of cryptocurrency coins and tokens. Decisions in Economics and Finance 44: 981–1014. [CrossRef] Gerlach, Jan-Christian, Guilherme Demos, and Didier Sornette. 2019. Dissection of bitcoin’s multiscale bubble history from january 2012 to february 2018. Royal Society Open Science 6: 180643. [CrossRef] Giudici, Paolo, and Silvia Figini. 2009. Applied Data Mining for Business and Industry. Chichester: Wiley Online Library. Grifﬁn, John, and Amin Shams. 2020. Is Bitcoin really untethered? The Journal of Finance 75: 1913–64. [CrossRef] Grobys, Klaus, and Niranjan Sapkota. 2020. Predicting cryptocurrency defaults. Applied Economics 52: 5060–76. [CrossRef] Gündüz, Necla, and Ernest Fokoué. 2017. On the predictive properties of binary link functions. Communications Faculty of Sciences University of Ankara Series A1 Mathematics and Statistics 66: 1–18. Hamrick, James Farhang Rouhi, Arghya Mukherjee, Amir Feder, Neil Gandal, Tyler Moore, and Marie Vasek. 2021. An examination of the cryptocurrency pump-and-dump ecosystem. Information Processing & Management 58: 102506. Hanley, James, and Barbara McNeil. 1982. The meaning and use of the area under a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. Radiology 143: 29–36. [CrossRef] Hansen, Peter, Asger Lunde, and James Nason. 2011. The model conﬁdence set. Econometrica 79: 453–97. [CrossRef] Hartmann, Philipp. 2010. Interaction of market and credit risk. Journal of Banking and Finance 4: 697–702. [CrossRef] Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. 2009. The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. Hattori, Takahiro, and Ryo Ishida. 2021. Did the introduction of bitcoin futures crash the bitcoin market at the end of 2017? The North American Journal of Economics and Finance 56: 101322. [CrossRef] Ho, Tin Kam. 1995. Random decision forests. Paper presented at the 3rd International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, Montreal, QC, Canada, August 14–16; pp. 278–82 Hwang, Soosung, and Pedro Valls Pereira. 2006. Small sample properties of GARCH estimates and persistence. The European Journal of Finance 12: 473–94. [CrossRef] Hyndman, Rob, and George Athanasopoulos. 2018. Forecasting: Principles and Practice. OTexts. Available online: https://otexts.com/f pp2/ (accessed on 1 June 2022). Jalan, Akanksha, Roman Matkovskyy, and Andrew Urquhart. 2021. What effect did the introduction of bitcoin futures have on the bitcoin spot market? The European Journal of Finance 27: 1251–81. [CrossRef] James, Gareth, Daniela Witten, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. 2013. An Introduction to Statistical Learning. New York: Springer, Jing, Jiabao, Wenwen Yan, and Xiaomei Deng. 2021. A hybrid model to estimate corporate default probabilities in China based on zero-price probability model and long short-term memory. Applied Economics Letters 28: 413–20. [CrossRef] Joseph, Ciby. 2013. Advanced Credit Risk Analysis and Management. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons. Köchling, Gerrit, Janis Müller, and Peter N. Posch. 2019. Does the introduction of futures improve the efﬁciency of bitcoin? Finance Research Letters 30: 367–70. [CrossRef]

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2022, 15, 304 Koenker, Roger, and Jungmo Yoon. 2009. Parametric links for binary choice models: A ﬁsherian-bayesian colloquy. Econometrics 152: 120–30. [CrossRef] Krzanowski, Wojtek, and David Hand. 2009. ROC Curves for Continuous Data. Boca Raton: Crc Press. Lansky, Jan. 2018. Possible state approaches to cryptocurrencies. Journal of Systems Integration 9: 19. [CrossRef] Li, Lili, Jun Yang, and Xin Zou. 2016. A study of credit risk of Chinese listed companies: ZPP versus KMV. Applied Economics 48: Liu, Ruozhou, Shanfeng Wan, Zili Zhang, and Xuejun Zhao. 2020. Is the introduction of futures responsible for the crash of bitcoin? Finance Research Letters 34: 101259. [CrossRef] Cryptocurrencies value-at-risk and expected shortfall: Do regime-switching volatility models improve forecasting? International Journal of Finance & Economics 26: 4840–55. McCullagh, Peter, and John A. Nelder. 1989. Generalized Linear Model. Boca Raton: Chapman Hall. Metz, Charles. 1978. Basic principles of ROC analysis. Seminars in Nuclear Medicine 8: 283–98. [CrossRef] Metz, Charles, and Helen Kronman. 1980. Statistical signiﬁcance tests for binormal ROC curves. Journal of Mathematical Psychology 22: Moscatelli, Mirko, Fabio Parlapiano, Simone Narizzano, and Gianluca Viggiano. 2020. Corporate default forecasting with machine learning. Expert Systems with Applications 161: 113567. [CrossRef] Narayanan, Arvind, Joseph Bonneau, Edward Felten, Andrew Miller, and Steven Goldfeder. 2016. Technologies: A Comprehensive Introduction. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Provost, Foster, and R Kohavi. 1998. Glossary of terms. Journal of Machine Learning 30: 271–74. Rodriguez, Arnulfo, and Pedro N Rodriguez. 2006. Understanding and predicting sovereign debt rescheduling: A comparison of the areas under receiver operating characteristic curves. Journal of Forecasting 25: 459–79. [CrossRef] Romesburg, Charles. 2004. Cluster Analysis for Researchers. North Carolina: Lulu.com. Sammut, Claude, and Geoffrey Webb. 2011. Encyclopedia of Machine Learning. New York: Springer. Schar, Fabian, and Aleksander Berentsen. 2020. Bitcoin, Blockchain, and Cryptoassets: A Comprehensive Introduction. Schmitz, Tim, and Ingo Hoffmann. 2020. Re-evaluating cryptocurrencies’ contribution to portfolio diversiﬁcation—A portfolio analysis with special focus on german investors. arXiv, arXiv:2006.06237v2. Sid. 2018. How Peng Coin Will Surge 8–12x These Coming Weeks. Medium, July 8. Soni, Sandeep. 2021. RIP Cryptocurrencies: Number of ‘Dead’ Coins Up 35% over Last Year; Tally Nears 2000-Mark. Financial Express, Su, En-Der, and Shih-Ming Huang. 2010. Comparing ﬁrm failure predictions between logit, KMV, and ZPP models: Evidence from Taiwan’s electronics industry. Asia-Paciﬁc Financial Markets 17: 209–39. [CrossRef] Wei, Wang Chun. 2018. The impact of Tether grants on Bitcoin. Economics Letters 171: 19–22. [CrossRef] Xiong, Jinwu, Qing Liu, and Lei Zhao. 2020. A new method to verify bitcoin bubbles: Based on the production cost. The North American Journal of Economics and Finance 51: 101095. [CrossRef]

---NEW PAPER---

Initial coin offerings (ICOs): Why do they José Campino1*, Ana Brochado2 and Álvaro Rosa1 Initial coin offerings (ICOs) are a novel concept that first appeared in 2013 with the Mas- terCoin project proposed by J. R. Willett. These projects allow the financing of innovative ideas at a global level, which contributes to the democratization of financial investments and allows an entire new reach hardly achieved through conventional means (Brochado 2018). Highly technological solutions and the role of e-business have gained paramount importance, especially as a strong contributor to keeping the economy running in an extreme scenario, such as during the Covid-19 pandemic (Al-Omoush et al. 2020). Initial coin offering projects are technological ventures based on blockchain technology and Recent literature has addressed initial coin offering (ICO) projects, which are an innova- tive form of venture financing through cryptocurrencies using blockchain technol- ogy. Many features of ICOs remain unexplored, leaving much room for additional research, including the success factors of ICO projects. We investigate the success of ICO projects, with our main purpose being to identify factors that influence a project’s outcome. Following a literature review, from which several potential variables were collected, we used a database comprising 428 ICO projects in the banking/financial sector to regress several econometric models. We confirmed the impacts of several variables and obtained particularly valuable results concerning project and campaign variables. We confirmed the importance of a well-structured and informative white- paper. The proximity to certain markets with high availability of financial and human capital is also an important determinant of the success of an ICO. We also confirm the strong dependency on cryptocurrency and the impact of cryptocurrency valuations on the success of a project. Furthermore, we confirm the importance of social media in ICO projects, as well as the importance of human capital characteristics. Our research contributes to the ICO literature by capturing most of the success factors previously identified and testing their impacts based on a large database. The current research contributes to the building of systems theory and signaling theory by adapting their frameworks to the ICO environment. Our results are also important for regulators, as ICOs are mainly unregulated and have vast future potential, and for investors, who can benefit from our analysis and use it in their due diligence. Keywords:  Initial coin offering (ICO), Fintech, Bank, Financial services, Technology, Blockchain, Innovation, Venture capital, Crowdfunding, Success © The Author(s), 2022. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the mate- rial. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​ Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 1 Instituto Universitário de Full list of author information is available at the end of the

Page 2 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 are financed using cryptocurrency (Massey et al. 2017). An investor must convert fiat currency into cryptocurrency to participate in the project (Kranz et al. 2019). Once the funds have been released to the project promoter, the investor must receive the tokens corresponding to the contribution made. Tokens can assume different forms in ICOs (Howell et al. 2018): (i) currency tokens, such as cryptocurrency, for exchange and to be stored; (ii) security tokens, used as a traditional security but backed by a blockchain infrastructure; (iii) utility tokens (the most used type of token), which grant the investor rights to access a product or service. The characteristics of the project are compiled in a whitepaper, which is unregulated but tends to follow certain characteristics and can be compared to a regulated prospec- tus. The whitepaper is also a measure of the project’s credibility, as it contains technical information, business information, and information regarding the team. As in crowdfunding, the success of an ICO project may depend on the amount of capi- tal raised. An ICO project may have none to several thresholds defining the capital to be raised (Kranz et al. 2019): (i) no-cap: project without any limits regarding financing; (ii) soft-cap: minimum limit of capital achieved, in order to proceed with the project; (iii) hard-cap: maximum amount of capital accepted; (iv) collect and return: a hard cap is defined and, if surpassed, the tokens are distributed with respect to the ratio of the hard cap to the total funds received; (v) dynamic ceiling: several hard-cap limits are defined and kept secret; (vi) a combination of several of these characteristics. Initial coin offer- ings can be defined as a “decentralized method of financing, whereby a firm calls for funding by issuing coins to online investors. Coins (or tokens) are a digital medium of value exchange based on the blockchain, which can operate independently and can be traded between investors” (Huang et al. 2020, p. 3). This definition includes one essen- tial characteristic of ICO projects, namely, the existence of a secondary market for the Interest in digital solutions has increased, particularly during times of isolation, such as the Covid-19 pandemic. This can be seen in the strong correlation between the price of gold in an economic downturn and the valorization of ESPO, an exchange traded fund that tracks the market for the gaming industry (López-Cabarcos et al. 2020). Similarly, ICOs can benefit from their digital characteristics and gain the interest of the public. Indeed, interest in ICO projects has increased, as revealed by internet search trends and the size of the ICO market following that trend (Google 2020). From 2016 to 2019, 1676 token sales were successfully concluded, amounting to a total of approximately USD 29.2 billion (Coinschedule 2020). The highest-financed project obtained USD 4.1 billion—a 2017 project named EOS, which is software based on blockchain technology (ICOBench 2020). The countries with the highest number of ICOs and the greatest amount of capital are the USA and Singapore. In terms of the number of ICOs, the UK is in third place, and in terms of capital raised, the British Virgin Islands are in third place (ICOBench 2020). The categories in which ICOs are employed vary from year to year, but invest- ment in blockchain infrastructure is a constant investment regardless of the year. In 2019, the majority of ICO investments were in trading and investment platforms, pay- ment platforms, and blockchain infrastructure (Coinschedule 2020). The hype gained by ICO projects fell in 2019 following two years of considerable investment and high numbers of token sales successfully concluded. This fall is also due to the depreciation

Page 3 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 of cryptocurrency values in 2019 after two years of enormous appreciation against fiat Initial coin offering projects have been compared to other more traditional forms of financing, such as initial public offerings (Ofir and Sadeh 2019), venture capital (VC), and crowdfunding (Block et al. 2020). Nevertheless, ICOs have unique characteristics that differentiate them from other types of financing (Biasi and Chakravorti 2019) and make them more suitable for financing innovative projects that offer information goods (Chod and Lyandres 2020). Indeed, the use of blockchain solutions (e.g., equity-based security token offerings) for financing new ventures has several advantages. Regard- less of the sector in which they operate, newly created ventures obtained significantly lower discount rates when using these solutions compared to VC financing (Pazos 2019), increasing entrepreneurs’ returns (Catalini and Gans 2018). These unique characteris- tics are, among others, much lower costs involved in the investment process, investment in cryptocurrencies, projects based on blockchain technology, existence of a secondary market for the tokens sold (Chen 2018), no third parties involved, and lower investment thresholds (OECD 2019). These characteristics allow the democratization of access to capital markets (Brochado 2018). Democratization shows the global reach of these projects. Indeed, ICO projects use the power of a wide reach to obtain contributions from a vast crowd of investors. As in crowdsourcing, ICO projects can reduce or eliminate the involvement of third parties because of the blockchain’s trust-free (participants no longer need a trusted third party) and transparent nature, which allows completely secure transactions (Frizzo-Barker et al. 2019). The use of the crowd and its direct link to entrepreneurs or companies can provide several benefits, namely, reduction of costs, greater brand visibility, and access to specialized skills (Christensen and Karlsson 2019). The current research focuses on the success factors of ICO projects, since the litera- ture to date on this is still scarce and has several gaps (Chen and Chen 2020). To the best of our knowledge, there are no studies capturing an extensive range of success factors; most focus on particular impacts of specific variables. Our study identified several suc- cess factors and grouped them into categories. Thus, we contribute to the literature by grouping a large number of success factors into a single investigation applied to a single large database. We focused on the characteristics of projects that influence their final outcomes and determined which of them are the most important. Our research aimed to answer the following proposition: What are the success factors of ICO projects and what are their impacts on project outcomes? The general systems theory The general systems theory has its roots in the 1940s, when the Austrian biologist Lud- wig von Bertalanffy created a new approach applicable to all fields of science that sought to address the increasing complexity of the world’s problems. The main objective of this theory is to understand the individual and his environment as part of a broad interac- tive system, and the aim is to study the interactions from different holistic perspectives

Page 4 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 (Skyttner 2005). In short, the theory sees each activity, object, or individual as not behav- ing alone, but as being part of a larger system with which they interact. A system can be understood as a combination of objects that have regular interactions and are interdependent (Mele et al. 2010). The theory seeks to deconstruct every objec- tof study to understand the system in which it is integrated. It is argued that it is impos- sible to understand a given phenomenon only by analyzing its elementary components, but rather by observing it from a higher level (Mele et al. 2010). The role of information is also highlighted in systems theory, as it is particularly important in communication in accordance with information theory. The flow of infor- mation should be from the sender to the receiver, who then provides crucial feedback on the continuity of the flow (Bertalanffy 1968). An important principle related to informa- tion is the distinction between open, closed, and isolated systems. In open systems, the participants exchange energy, matter, people, and information, whereas in closed sys- tems, there are exchanges of only energy, and in isolated systems, there are no exchanges (Mele et  al. 2010). Open systems theory (OST) builds on these concepts to look at organizations and their relationships with the environment in which they operate. It is argued that organizations must be able to process information about their environment and adapt, in order to thrive. Therefore, organizations must be adaptable, in order to survive (Katz and Kahn 1979). The study of cybernetics highlights that the actions taken by a system can cause changes in the environment. This leads to the adaptation of the system, as changes in the environment are perceived as feedback (Skyttner 2005; Mele et al. 2010). The last impor- tant concept to address in this study concerns the idea suggested by the viable system approach. This approach states that there are relationships among sub-systems (inter- nal components of the organizations) and supra-systems (organizations themselves and other systemic entities) (Mele et al. 2010). Initial coin offering projects can be classified as ventures operating in an open systems model, similar to crowdsourcing (Geiger et al. 2011a). As in crowd funding and crowd- sourcing, ICO ventures have several iterations with external agents, which can alter the project’s perception (Zha et al. 2020), namely, the website where the ICO is published, specialists who classify the project by providing ratings, and several stakeholders who are ultimately potential investors (this iteration can occur before, during, and after the financing campaign). Blockchain projects can facilitate governance functions (e.g., vot- ing and coalitions), as entrepreneurs and investors can be involved in corporate govern- ance matters to protect their interests. This proves the true nature of ICOs as an open system (Catalini and Gans 2018; Frizzo-Barker et al. 2019). This interaction with external parties is characterized by an exchange of information that generates stimuli used in business processes to improve or reward investors (Doan et al. 2011). Similarly, the crowdsourcing projects and ICO projects have a process that proves their operation within an open system and as part of a larger environment: (i) the preselection of contributors, (ii) accessibility of peer contributions, (iii) aggregation of contributions, and (iv) remuneration for contributions (Geiger et al. 2011b). The rela- tionships between the systems in ICOs are long lasting, as they continue after the project is completed and the token advances to the secondary market (Ackermann et al. 2020). The iterations should provide feedback that allows the system to adapt (Bertalanffy

Page 5 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 1968). Hence, feedback is of tremendous importance in ICOs because of the role of the investors’ network and their presence in social networks (Zha et al. 2020), where good feedback can lead to further investment (Xuan et al. 2020). According to systems theory, organizations themselves are seen as systems that are composed of subsystems divided into two components: (i) social components, which represent the people, and (ii) technical components, which represent the technology and machines (Emery and Trist 1965). There are several iterations among subsystems (Mele et al. 2010). Initial coin offering projects are characterized by their core technological component (Albrecht et al. 2019), but the importance of the team and its characteristics has become important in the literature (An et al. 2019). The relationship between the social and technological components should be analyzed as part of a successful project. Indeed, the technological aspects of a project may be complemented by aspects of the team and its characteristics. The supra-system relationship in ICOs can be challenging because of the lack of regu- lation and surveillance, which can lead to a lack of transparency concerning the project’s details (Hacker and Thomale 2018; Giudici and Adhami 2019). Indeed, blockchain pro- jects allow privacy and transparency, as the information on a certain transaction is made public but the parties involved are kept private. Some challenges and risks associated with blockchain projects are the volatility of cryptocurrencies, governance, regulation, fraud, environmental costs, and security, as there is a guarantee that the information coded is true (Frizzo-Barker et al. 2019). Therefore, information assumes a crucial role, as described by systems theory. Initial coin offerings should be able to process and send information, as described by OST, and then receive and incorporate feedback. Organiza- tions that are able to survive in a certain context characterized by change by adapting to the feedback received are considered viable systems (Mele et al. 2010). The exchange of information described here can be materialized in the signals sent by the ICO projects to investors in this supra-system relationship (connection among enterprises). Investors should then send feedback to projects that inform them of good or poor performance. This should lead to the adaptation of projects in this constant open systems relationship. As the signals described here assume a crucial role in the supra-system relationship, signaling theory might contribute to the analysis undertaken in the current research. Initial coin offerings must be understood as part of an environment comprising sev- eral systems. These systems interact with each other and within themselves. The supra- system interactions are characterized by the exchange of information, here treated as signals of the projects’ quality and posterior feedback. However, the ICO market is char- acterized by information asymmetries between promoters and investors (Momtaz 2019). The promoters of the projects hold crucial information on their own capabilities and each project’s characteristics, which investors do not (Yadav 2017). Building on signaling theory, this is an information asymmetry problem (Spence 1973). Signaling theory states that several markets are characterized by an information gap between buyers and sellers, notably financial markets, in which investors do not have the same level of information

Page 6 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 Building on signaling theory, another issue is raised concerning the high information disparities between the project’s promoters and investors during supra-system interac- tions. The issue concerns the adverse selection concept, which states that when there are considerable differences in the level of information between two agents interacting with one another in an open systems relationship, the one with more information can pro- ceed in a dishonest way, to the disadvantage of the other. An agent with less information is not able to understand the true quality of a product (Wilson 1989). In a market char- acterized by adverse selection, there is no distinction between good-quality projects and poor-quality projects that are sold at the same price (Grossman 1981). Therefore, there is a need to ensure that buyers with less information are provided with quality signals that can identify a good quality product in a very unequal market (Milgrom 1981). Without proper information transfer among the participants, the markets will perform poorly, as entrepreneurs may not always be completely transparent in the information they provide. Performing correct and deep due diligence is costly; thus, third parties arise, in order to overcome this difficulty. Being an outside party connecting both inves- tors and entrepreneurs, these institutions fulfill the role of collecting unbiased informa- tion and are the (remunerated) channels among market participants (Leland and Pyle Thus, signaling theory relies on signalers, receivers, and signals. Signalers have access to privileged information and must transmit it to the receivers, in order to be perceived as having a high-quality project. The signals sent to the receivers must have two charac- teristics, in order to be effective in reducing information asymmetry (in the event that it exists): (i) be observable to the receiver; (ii) be costly to realize and imitate, since if no costs are involved, the signals will be easy to replicate and, thus, have no value (Domingo et al. 2020). A crucial assumption in signalling theory is that equivalent signals have dif- ferent costs depending on high- or low-quality projects. If the costs to produce a signal are much higher in a low-quality project than in a higher quality project, only the latter will choose to produce them. In VC projects, it is assumed that the aspects to be confirmed in the due diligence process are: (i) the size of the problem that the business is attempting to solve, (ii) the elegance of the solution, (iii) the entrepreneurial team, (iv) financial statements, and (v) legal aspects (Yadav 2017). As ICO projects are highly technological, due to using dis- tributed ledger technology (Kranz et al. 2019), they come with enormous financial risk (Kou et al. 2014); they include a lack of information disclosure and information asym- metries are substantially greater for these projects, which increases the need for signal- As ICOs are highly technological, signals they might use to affirm high-quality pro- jects to investors are: (i) patents (which are crucial in early financing stages and fulfill the criteria for effective signalling); (ii) technical whitepaper (as the primary source of detailed information about the project, the whitepaper should have information on the technological infrastructure of the project that is costly to produce and explain); (iii) high-quality source code (most developments based on blockchain technology occur through programming and, thus, high-quality code is required) (Fisch 2019). Signals to reduce information asymmetries might be published in the whitepaper, but they might also be available in other sources, such as dedicated ICO websites with extensive

Page 7 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 databases (Giudici and Adhami 2019) or social networks, such as Twitter (Xuan et al. 2020) or GitHub (Roosenboom et al. 2020). Signals are considered to be success factors of ICO projects because they reduce infor- mation asymmetries and the projects are more easily perceived as high-quality projects (Ackermann et al. 2020). There are additional factors that may not be considered sig- nals because they do not fulfill the necessary characteristics, but they can also influence the success of a project. Attention in the past was mainly directed toward crowdfund- ing projects, simply because they predated ICO projects. The literature reports many attempts to adapt crowdfunding success factors to ICO projects because of their similar- ities. Nevertheless, the success factors that have been identified as relevant in both tra- ditional and blockchain-based crowdfunding are few and are built around the following features: (i) industry, (ii) location, (iii) team size, (iv) number of advisors, (v) social net- work presence, (vi) share of retained equity/tokens, and (vii) early investment possibility (Hartmann, Grottolo, Wang, & Lunesu, 2019). Success factors can be categorized, for instance, as being related to the project itself or the campaign, and the literature has paid special attention to the importance of social networks as a determinant success factor in these types of project (Albrecht et al. 2019). Team characteristics have also received attention (Giudici and Adhami 2019). Success factors of the project The project’s success factors cover characteristics inherent to the project itself, namely, every characteristic is predefined when the ICO starts and is related to the idea proposed and the future outcome. In crowdfunding, technological companies typically obtain the most financing and are also the most successful. Of these, younger companies are the most successful because crowdfunding generally targets these companies specifically (Ralcheva and Roosenboom 2016). As they are also a way of financing high-risk projects, ICO projects fulfill these characteristics because they are technological ventures based on blockchain, mostly without any track record, and are created only to conclude the ICO and develop a project. The first success factor we identified was related to the industry in which the project was positioned. The project’s industry is directly linked to its success, and studies reveal that, depending on the project’s area, there are different coefficients influencing the outcome of the project, some of which negatively influence the outcome (Davies and Giovannetti 2018). Note that the project promoters’ previous experience in the indus- try is not considered relevant for a successful outcome, revealing that entrepreneurial experience and industry expertise are not necessary for conducting a successful project (Mamonov and Malaga 2018). The location factor is also widely considered in the literature and has been reported to project success (Davies and Giovannetti 2018; Charlotte et al. 2019; Fisch 2019; Ack- ermann et al. 2020). The geography of ICOs has been found to be important because its presence in markets with specific conditions contributes to the flourishing of blockchain-based ventures. For instance, the existence of developed financial mar- kets, advanced digital technologies, crowdfunding platforms, and the will to develop

Page 8 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 regulations contribute significantly to the attraction of ICO projects (Huang et al. 2020). Projects located in the USA are considered to have particularly positive outcomes, (Fisch 2019), along with projects located in Israel and China (Fenu et al. 2018). It is also sug- gested that projects located in larger cities are more successful than others (Ralcheva In ICO projects, a reference to follow specific legislation does not influence the pro- ject’s success, mainly because of the paucity of regulation in the market (Giudici and Adhami 2019). As the overall ICO market is unregulated, investors tend to reduce infor- mation asymmetries through the channels available to them, namely, the project’s web- site, social media platforms, and whitepapers. As a result, opaque projects are disfavored by investors and are less successful (Bourveau et al. 2018). Despite the lack of regulation, investors follow certain rules that could help regulators intervene in the future (Amsden and Schweizer 2019). An increase in the regulation and supervision of the ICO market is expected, due to the importance of investor protection and crime/fraud prevention. These measures may contribute to the expansion of the ICO market (Huang et al. 2020). Two concrete proposals for ICO market regulation are as follows: (i) international efforts for the creation of international legislation concerning ICOs; (ii) EU regulatory actions to make ICOs comply with regulatory guidelines concerning the disclosure of crucial information (Hacker and Thomale 2018). Although not regulated and not follow- ing specific guidelines, most of a project’s formal information is described in whitepa- pers, which are a crucial step in an ICO project. Several studies have focused on the role of the whitepaper as a fundamental way of reducing information asymmetry and have arrived at some important conclusions. Nevertheless, the mere existence of a whitepa- per does not positively influence a project’s outcome; importance resides in the content of the whitepaper (Adhami, Giudici, & Martinazzi, 2018). There is a common idea that the length of the whitepaper influences a project’s success (Bourveau et al. 2018; Ams- den and Schweizer 2019; Fisch 2019). Being a primary source of information, its greatest value resides in reducing information asymmetry between promoters and investors (Ofir Although the conclusions are very similar concerning the length of the whitepaper, there are some discrepancies concerning the technical nature of the whitepaper. Tech- nical whitepapers include those in the areas of system architecture, smart contract description, and technical diagrams (Albrecht et al. 2019). Whitepapers with technical aspects are considered to contribute to the success of the project because they are gener- ally taken as a sign of quality and technical expertise (Feng et al. 2019; Fisch 2019). Nev- ertheless, there are arguments on the opposite side, assuming that technical whitepapers do not influence a positive outcome in the long term, but have a positive impact only at the beginning of the ICO campaign (Albrecht et al. 2019). Having a secondary market and a tradable token is a predominant characteristic of ICO projects and the main distinguishing point from crowdfunding (Brochado 2018). Having a secondary market, that is, being listed on at least one crypto exchange, is cru- cial to a project’s success. As the tradability of the token in the secondary market is of tremendous importance (Ackermann et  al. 2020), there is also a positive effect from being listed in more than one crypto exchange (Lyandres et al. 2019). Some researchers consider the secondary market to be as important as the capital raised and it is itself,

Page 9 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 therefore, considered to be a measure of success because the project is appraised as suc- cessful only once it is tradable (Amsden and Schweizer 2019). It is important to highlight that token value is highly volatile and can be seriously jeopardized by adverse industry events, such as technical hacks or regulatory actions (Momtaz 2020a). Success factors of the campaign The campaign’s success factors are focused on the relevant features prepared prior to the beginning of the campaign and during that period. These factors are of enormous impor- tance, as the campaign period is the timeframe during which promoters raise capital and is when the project reveals a positive or negative outcome (achieving or not achieving the minimum threshold of capital needed). The common argument is that a longer cam- paign negatively affects the performance of a project, and shorter campaigns are more likely to see better outcomes (Davies and Giovannetti 2018; An et al. 2019; Fisch 2019; Ackermann et al. 2020; Roosenboom et al. 2020). It is also important that, during the campaign period, promoters do not put excessive pressure on investors to obtain financ- ing because these attitudes are associated with negative results in terms of capital raised (Albrecht et al. 2019). Before the campaign’s official period starts, it is very common to have a pre-sale of tokens in ICO projects. These sales offer discounts and bonuses to investors who bear more risk by making an early investment (Liu and Wang 2019). Several studies suggest a positive impact of pre-sale campaigns and project success (Giudici and Adhami 2019; Lyandres et al. 2019; Ackermann et al. 2020; Roosenboom et al. 2020). There is also a concern that pre-sale campaigns may indeed have a negative impact on a project’s suc- cess (Momtaz 2020a), mainly because investors perceive an immediate need to cover expenses, and the bonuses offered to investors may lead to them dumping the tokens in the secondary market, in order to maximize profits, thereby negatively impacting the project’s overall success (Amsden and Schweizer 2019). The bonus schemes, sometimes offered by the promoters, may negatively affect a project’s success (Adhami et al. 2018; Charlotte et al. 2019; Giudici and Adhami 2019; Roosenboom et al. 2020) because ICO projects with larger bonuses are perceived as possible scams (Lee et al. 2019), increas- ing the chances of token dumping in the secondary market. Meanwhile, lower token prices seem to have a positive influence on the project’s success because investors tend to be more interested in cheaper tokens, allowing them to buy several tokens from dif- ferent projects (Burns and Moro 2018; de Jong et al. 2018; Yuryev 2018). The need to buy tokens from different projects concerns the need to have portfolio diversification because, due to information asymmetries, investors have a high likelihood of selecting poor projects, which underscores the importance of portfolio diversification (Boreiko Nevertheless, most of the time investors can spot scam projects and avoid investing in them, which provides them with tremendous returns when investing in an ICO (Bene- detti and Kostovetsky 2018). In terms of a project’s financing thresholds (i.e., soft-cap and hard-cap limits), the existence of hard-cap limits positively influences the project’s success, as investors can better assess the value of the tokens (Amsden and Schweizer 2019). However, higher hard-cap limits, seemingly impossible to achieve, have negative effects on the project’s success (Lyandres et al. 2019). The existence of soft-cap limits is

Page 10 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 considered to have a positive influence on a project’s success (Amsden and Schweizer 2019), but there is no consensus, as there is also evidence of its negative effects (Bour- veau et al. 2018). Investment in ICOs is done using cryptocurrency, and several cryptocurrencies may be accepted by the promoters of a project. Campaigns accepting multiple currencies are more successful than those that accept only one (Charlotte et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2019). Accepting several currencies is evidence of a project’s quality, revealing technical knowl- edge, since accepting numerous currencies requires blockchain expertise (Amsden and Schweizer 2019). There are concerns regarding the huge volatility of cryptocurrencies (Frizzo-Barker et al. 2019). As ICO financing is done via cryptocurrencies, their volatility has a large impact on a project’s success, particularly Ethereum volatility (Myalo and Glukhov 2019), because most projects are based on Ethereum technology (Fenu et al. 2018). Not surprisingly, Ethereum-based ventures achieved more successful results (Fisch 2019). Consequently, the higher price of Ether diminishes the attractiveness of investment in an ICO, which means a higher opportunity cost for the investor, and it is, thus, negatively correlated with the project’s success (Amsden and Schweizer 2019; Roosenboom et al. 2020). Most projects require quality code to be successful and to smoothly meet the many requirements of an ICO campaign. Therefore, the existence and availability of high-qual- ity code or code parts positively influence a project’s success (Blaseg 2018; Amsden and Schweizer 2019; Ackermann et al. 2020) because investors have the chance to assess the degree of the project’s technical quality (Adhami et al. 2018). Finally, experts’ ratings of projects are also a way of reducing information asymmetries and identifying better projects. Although some concerns have been raised, the ratings attributed by third parties tend to replace traditional third-party involvement and can determine the success of an ICO with considerable precision (Liu and Wang 2019). Con- sequently, experts’ ratings are linked to project success (Fenu et al. 2018; Rhue 2018; Lee et al. 2019; Xuan et al. 2020). Success factors of social networks Social networks are strong contributors to innovation through the promotion of collabo- rative work (Al-Omoush et al. 2020). Great weight has been given to the presence and use of social networks, as they influence the output of ICO projects. Social networks are key to conferring legitimacy to projects, as the content provided in the social networks’ environment is not entirely controlled by project promoters. Indeed, media-provided content is more effective than firm-provided content in influencing investors’ behav- ior (Chanson et  al. 2018). Skillful management of social networks can promote high amounts of early contributions and the constant updates throughout the ICO campaign contribute to a project’s success (Ante et al. 2018; Bourveau et al. 2018; Ackermann et al. Social media can be used to influence investors’ behavior (Liu and Wang 2019), but simply being present on one or several social networks does not influence the project’s success. In order to be relevant, social networks must be maintained and managed cor- rectly, including the frequent posting of updates on the campaign (Xuan et al. 2020). The importance of social media derives from the fact that it can influence investors’ behavior

Page 11 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 (Liu and Wang 2019). The most commonly used social networks in ICO projects are Twitter and GitHub, with the latter being a public repository of code. Concerning Twit- ter, there is evidence of a positive relationship between market capitalization and the active use of Twitter. Nevertheless, this utilization must be regular and not exaggerated, since high-intensity activity on Twitter is associated with positive returns in the very short term, but with negative returns beyond that (Benedetti and Kostovetsky 2018). Activity on Twitter must be related to positive messages associated with the project, and interactions with potential investors must be maintained during the campaign (Albrecht et al. 2019). The content related to the Twitter account is of paramount importance, but some content may be interpreted as nothing more than cheap marketing and have nega- tive effects on the project’s success—for instance, linking the campaign with the crypto- currency topic or to the blockchain topic (Albrecht et al. 2019). There is proof that the activity of the social network account is also important because there is a proven negative effect on the number of accounts the project is following and the project’s success (Albrecht et al. 2019). This is also considered to be cheap marketing and an easy way to obtain followers. Overall, the importance of having a Twitter account in ICO projects is clearly demonstrated, as this is a good way to better communicate with investors and an additional way to reduce information asymmetries (Burns and Moro 2018; Cerchiello et al. 2019; Fisch 2019; Xuan et al. 2020), similar to what happens in crowdfunding (Greenberg et al. 2013). The importance of having active and well-managed social network accounts is extended to the use of the GitHub platform as a source of public code, which strengthens the project’s success (Albrecht et al. 2019; Amsden and Schweizer 2019), especially dur- ing the pre-sales of tokens (Roosenboom et al. 2020). Finally, several researchers point to the importance of having an active and well-managed website as a driver to differentiate high-quality projects from scams, which also contributes to positive project outcomes (de Jong et al. 2018; Cerchiello et al. 2019; Pereza et al. 2020). Success factors of the team Social capital has been identified as pivotal in the development of companies’ proac- tiveness. Furthermore, social capital is crucial for the development of entrepreneur- ial and innovative digital opportunities (Al-Omoush et al. 2020). The importance of a team’s characteristics and its disclosure has been highlighted in the literature as having an impact on a project’s success (An et  al. 2019). Several human capital characteris- tics have been highlighted, including team size, professional experience, technological background, and social media presence (Brochado 2018). In ICO projects, larger teams tend to be related to more successful projects, as pointed out in several studies (Ante et  al. 2018; Amsden and Schweizer 2019; Cerchiello et  al. 2019; Giudici and Adhami 2019; Liu and Wang 2019; Roosenboom et al. 2020). Similarly, there is a positive rela- tionship between larger advisory teams and the success of ICO projects (Ante et  al. 2018; Amsden and Schweizer 2019; Cerchiello et al. 2019; Charlotte et al. 2019; Giu- dici and Adhami 2019). Concerning team characteristics, such as professional experi- ence, managerial experience, education, and entrepreneurial background, there is proof that only past managerial experience is relevant for a project’s success, while education, professional experience, and entrepreneurial background are not relevant (Giudici and

Page 12 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 Adhami 2019). The same has been demonstrated in crowdfunding projects (Allison et al. 2017). Likewise, in human capital characteristics, higher ratings attributed to teams by independent experts are associated with successful project outcome (Momtaz 2020a, b). There is still no consensus regarding a single success measure for ICO projects, since different studies follow different measures, each with a purpose and good reasoning to identify the success of a venture. In fact, some studies have aggregated several measures with similar results (de Jong et al. 2018). As the secondary market is seen as extremely important for the project to be successful, it is considered to be a measure of success because it is considered that the project’s success is directly linked to the tradability of tokens. Indeed, the project can only be considered successful if the tokens sold can be traded in a secondary market that takes place in a crypto exchange (Amsden and Sch- weizer 2019; Roosenboom et al. 2020). Other measures have also been developed and are equally important. One of these is a binary variable, in which a positive result is achieved when the project reaches its own soft-cap threshold (Roosenboom et al. 2020; Ahmad et al. 2020), and intrinsically related is the measure, in which a percentage is made on the capital reached above that threshold, with the most successful being those with higher percentages (de Jong et al. 2018). The same logic applies to a binary variable measuring the achievement of a pre-established hard cap (Ahmad et al. 2020). These measures can capture the success of the project in relative terms; in other words, in terms of its objec- tives. Hence, a project that predefines financing thresholds should be evaluated, taking them into account. However, these measures may not assess projects without financing Therefore, as in crowdfunding, the most common measure of success is the capital raised, allowing the inclusion of all the projects in a database and allowing their differ- entiation given the amount of capital they have achieved (Fisch 2019; Roosenboom et al. 2020; Šapkauskienė and Višinskaitė 2020). This measure lacks the advantage of being able to evaluate a project in relative terms. Nevertheless, the total capital raised is in line with the theory of open systems because it is the ultimate proof of information exchange and feedback. Furthermore, it allows the assessment of the final capital obtained, regard- less of any predefined threshold, which should be a strong and unbiased measure for the quality of a given project. This should be the preferred measure for evaluating a project’s We built our research based on two main theories: general systems theory (Bertalanffy 1968) and signaling theory (Spence 1973). We also used the concept of adverse selec- tion to complement the theoretical background (Grossman 1981). Our conclusion is that ICO projects fit the definition of an open systems model (Geiger et al. 2011a), in which there are several interactions between systems (supra-system relationships) and within themselves (sub-system relationships) (Mele et  al. 2010). Therefore, there is a crucial importance given to the flow of information between the agents in the open systems model described (Bertalanffy 1968). This information is essential to the adaptation of the system via the feedback provided by an external system operating within the same

Page 13 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 environment, particularly the project team and investors. The ICO project environment is characterized by tremendous information asymmetries between the project’s promot- ers and investors (Momtaz 2019). The markets, in which the information is unequally distributed, tend to perform poorly (Leland and Pyle 1977), and another issue arises concerning the high likelihood of good-quality products being sold together with poor- quality products (Grossman 1981). This issue may also lead to dishonesty. The character- istics highlighted here are summarized in the concept of adverse selection. For all of these reasons, the quality of the information provided as signals by the pro- ject’s promoters to investors is crucial (Milgrom 1981). We conclude that the infor- mation provided in the systems’ interaction contributes to the ultimate success of the project. This is verified by the effect of feedback provided by external systems and the subsequent adaptation of the project, as well as by the ultimate achievement of greater financing amounts (Skyttner 2005; Mele et al. 2010). We have highlighted that the infor- mation regarding these projects is considered to represent quality signals that help to reduce adverse selection and, ultimately, attract greater amounts of capital. We have summarized this information and considered it to comprise a project’s success factors. The literature highlights several success factors related to the project itself, the financing campaign, the use of social media, and the characteristics of human capital. The main objective of the current research is to understand what the relevant success factors are, described here as signals, that contribute to the positive output of an ICO project. Therefore, the study tests the following hypotheses: (H1) the signals provided by the project promoters to investors in the open systems relationships contribute pos- itively to the outcome of a project; (H2) projects that provide higher levels of quality information are more successful. Four econometric models were built containing several variables identified as signals of project quality. The four models differ in terms of the dependent variable used: (i) logarithmic version of the total capital raised by a project, (ii) binary variable measuring the achievement of the soft-cap threshold, (iii) binary variable measuring the achieve- ment of the hard-cap threshold, and (iv) binary variable measuring the existence of a secondary market. The reasoning behind the creation of several models was to ensure that the results remain consistent among them and to understand which dependent var- iable best captures a project’s success. The variables were clustered according to their characteristics and subsequently added to the model. We expect that projects that pro- vide more information are also the most successful, measured in terms of capital raised. This measure is a direct result of good quality signaling and also functions as feedback in the dynamics of open systems. The database was built through an API accessible with a premium subscription to the ICO Bench website and comprises 556 projects in the banking/financial sector. This sec- tor was selected due to the impacts it faces from the rise of Fintech companies (Kou et al. 2021) and its role as a third party that is challenged by new models, such as ICOs (Frizzo-Barker et al. 2019; Campino et al. 2020). The database contains several key pieces of information on ICO projects: (i) information on the project itself, namely, the project’s

Page 14 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 year, information on the whitepaper, project ratings, and location; (ii) information on the campaign, namely, financing threshold amounts, the existence of bonus schemes or pre-sales of tokens; (iii) information on the team, namely, the number of team members, the number of advisors, and the number of projects, in which each member has partici- pated; (iv) information on the use of social media, namely, which social media is used by the project and by the promoters. Of the 556 projects available we were able to work with 428. The projects discarded had incomplete information, which prevented their correct analysis and could have led to a biased model. The sample is mainly comprised of projects located in Europe (239 projects). The second most represented location is the Asia–Pacific region with 106 pro- jects, followed by North America with 44 projects. The other locations combined repre- sent 59 projects. Most of the projects have low (180 projects) or average (179 projects) ratings attributed by external parties, and very few projects obtain exceptional classifica- tions (69 projects). Most of the entrepreneurs have participated in up to three projects (3073 profiles), and only a few promoters have participated in more than three projects (85 profiles). The majority of the teams comprised between 11 and 20 members. Com- plementing the database, we collected information using the Twitter and LinkedIn social network platforms. We were able to collect information on Twitter activity, such as the number of followers and activity during the ICO campaign, and on LinkedIn networks, such as the team members’ number of connections from team members. The dependent variable that primarily captures projects’ success is the total capital raised by each project in U.S. dollars, as used in previous studies. We used its logarithmic form in our econometric model. We also regressed three extra models using different depend- ent variables: (i) a binary variable measuring the achievement of the soft-cap threshold, (ii) a binary variable measuring the achievement of the hard-cap threshold, and (iii) a binary variable measuring the existence of a secondary market. The independent vari- ables can be divided into four main groups: (i) project variables (related to the project’s characteristics), (ii) campaign variables (related to ICO campaign characteristics), (iii) social network variables (related to the activity on social networks), and (iv) team vari- ables (related to human capital characteristics). Concerning the project variables, we captured variables related to the project itself and obtained the following: (i) whitepaper (we captured three main characteristics of the whitepaper, namely, its length, the disclosure of the project’s team, and technical aspects; (ii) restricted countries (number of countries, in which the project has restrictions); (iii) region (the project’s region divided between North America, Asia–Pacific, and Europe). The variables capturing the campaign characteristics are focused on aspects relevant to the ICO campaign as follows: (i) pre-sales (captures the existence of token pre-sales); (ii) bonus scheme (captures the existence of a bonus to investors); (iii) token price (cap- tures the price at which the token was sold); (iv) cryptocurrencies’ average prices (cap- tures the yearly average price of Bitcoin and Ethereum); (v) currencies accepted (captures the number of currencies the project accepts as investment) (Table 1). Social networks have become an essential part of the promotion of new ventures, and we captured their characteristics as follows: (i) Twitter activity (activity during the

Page 15 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 campaign, the number of followers the project has, and the number of tweets made); (ii) GitHub activity (captures the existence of a GitHub account and the existence of publicly available code before the ICO campaign); (iii) active website (captures the existence of an available website in May 2020). Concerning the team variables, we were able to capture the following aspects: (i) team members (number of members in the team); (ii) advisors (number of advisors in the pro- ject); (iii) LinkedIn connections (the sum of team members’ LinkedIn connections). There were several more variables that we were able to capture, but that we decided not to include in the model due to multicollinearity issues (Wooldridge 2013). We obtained several ratings attributed to the project, namely, project rating, team rating, vision rat- ing, and product rating. These variables had a strong relationship among themselves and, Table 1  Variable description Log of the capital raised Logarithm of the total capital raised in USD Binary variable measuring the achievement of the soft-cap Binary variable measuring the achievement of the hard-cap Existence of a secondary market Binary variable measuring the existence of a secondary market Binary variable stating the disclosure of the team in the white- Binary variable stating the technicity of the whitepaper Whitepaper: word count log Logarithm of the total whitepaper’s word count Variable accounting the number of countries where the project Binary variable stating the project’s region Binary variable stating the project’s region Binary variable stating the project’s region Binary variable stating the existence of pre-sales Binary variable stating the existence of bonus schemes Logarithm of the token’s price Logarithm of Bitcoin’s average yearly price Logarithm of Ethereum’s average yearly price Number of currencies accepted by the project Twitter: active during campaign Binary variable stating the campaign’s status on Twitter Logarithm of the number of Twitter’s followers Twitter: number of tweets log Logarithm of the number of tweets Binary variable stating the existence of a Github account Github: existing code prior to ICO Binary variable stating the existence of code on Github prior to Website active on May, 2020 Binary variable stating the ICO website’s status Logarithm of the number of elements in the team Logarithm of the number of advisors in the team Team members’ connections on LinkedIn

Page 16 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 although for prediction purposes, this would not be an issue, collinearity could influence regression coefficients. Therefore, we decided to retain only the project rating because it is the most general rating that captures the greatest number of project features. The same occurred with Twitter followers and profiles followed by the project. A collinearity issue was present in this case, and we decided to keep only Twitter followers because, according to the literature, it is an important characteristic and, also, because it was con- sidered to be a statistically significant variable with a higher coefficient. We used STATA 14 software to develop the econometric models and perform sev- eral tests. We first regressed the econometric model using the standard ordinary least squares (OLS) method and performed a test to detect skewness and kurtosis, which we verified to be present. Therefore, we applied a Shapiro–Wilk test to confirm that the residuals did not have a normal distribution (STATA 2020a). There was also an issue with heteroskedasticity, since the residuals exhibited non-constant variation confirmed by the Breusch-Pagan test and reinforced by White’s general test for heteroskedasticity, which overcomes some limitations of the first test (Williams 2020). We confirmed that there was no multicollinearity issue after adjusting for variables with a variance inflation The standard OLS method was used to regress the first and main econometric model, as its dependent variable is the logarithmic version of the total capital obtained by the pro- ject. Although the standard OLS method could be used, it could also be biased, and we decided to run a robust regression using the command “rreg” in STATA (STATA 2020b). Although the OLS estimator has dominated the literature and the application of regres- sion techniques, robust regression techniques appeared as a strong substitute because they offer protection against distortion of anomalous data (Li 1985). There is no single method for a robust regression; on STATA, the command first fits the regression with Cook’s Distance excluding observations for which D > 1 and then works iteratively (Hilbe et al. 1991) by running a regression, calculating case weights from absolute residuals, and regressing again using those weights until the value of the weights drops below the predefined tolerance value of 0.01 (STATA 2020b). The weights are derived from two complementary weight functions, namely, Huber (1964) and biweights (Beaton and Tukey 1974). They are complementary measures since “Huber weights have problems dealing with severe outliers, whereas biweights sometimes fail to converge or have mul- tiple solutions” (STATA 2020b). This regression type has already been used in the ICO literature (de Jong et al. 2018; Fisch 2019). The data on ICO projects can be difficult to obtain because they are dis- persed among several sources. Several websites have been collecting reliable data on these projects, which allows for their study. Nevertheless, ICOs are disruptive projects and a recent phenomenon that does not follow many specified rules. Therefore, the data on them are characterized by several outliers in several categories of analysis, which makes it harder to apply the standard OLS method for regression models. These reasons

Page 17 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 make the use of a robust regression for the analysis of these projects a strong solution to overcome normality issues, among others. In this study, both the standard OLS method and the robust regression method obtained similar results. We decided to present the robust regression results because they are more suitable for the type of data obtained for the reasons mentioned. Furthermore, we progressively added the variables to verify the coefficient and p-values behavior to check the robustness of the model. For the models based on binary dependent variables, a logistic regression was used, as it is the appropriate method for this type of variable (STATA 2020c). Standard r-squared and adjusted r-squared values are presented for the first model, which uses a robust regression method. However, for the remaining models using a logistic regression, a pseudo r-squared is presented, also known as McFadden’s pseudo-r-squared. The projects comprising the database have a similar distribution in terms of success, considering the dependent variable measuring the total capital raised. However, using subsequent variables leads to a greater number of unsuccessful projects. Table 2 was built using IBM SPSS Statistics 26 to facilitate the analysis of the distribution of the inde- pendent variables contingent on the dependent variable used. Note that the results are very similar between the first two models (capital raised and soft-cap achievement) and between the last two (hard-cap achievement and secondary market existence), but with substantial differences among them. In the last two models, the percentage of unsuccessful projects is high, which makes the analysis much more dif- ficult. The measures of success used in the first two models allowed us to obtain a much more balanced percentage between success and failure, maintaining a clear tendency for more unsuccessful projects. The last two variables seem to incompletely capture the suc- cess of a project for several reasons: (i) the achievement of the hard cap assumes that the projects have a maximum financing threshold, which is not always the case (the same issue exists for the soft-cap achievement variable); (ii) the achievement of the hard-cap threshold is not a necessary condition for the project to be successful because a pro- ject has the necessary conditions to work once it achieves the soft-cap threshold; (iii) although it is expected, several projects may not achieve the stage of tradability in a sec- ondary market, but that does not necessarily mean that they did not achieve the financ- ing thresholds needed for the project’s funding. Focusing on the first two models, which allow for clearer conclusions regarding descriptive statistics, we confirm that disclosing the team and having a technical and longer whitepaper are associated with success, accounting for the highest percentage of success. In terms of country restrictions and project region, there is no clear division between successful and unsuccessful projects, as the percentages are similarly divided and do not lead to a clear conclusion. Concerning the campaign variables, we cannot reach a clear conclusion with descriptive statistics on the variables related to the exist- ence of pre-sales, the number of currencies accepted by the project, or the token price.

Page 18 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 Table 2  Cross table between dependent and independent variables Capital raised in USD

Page 19 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 Capital raised in USD Twitter number of tweets Github code prior ICO Website active on May, 2020 Existence of a secondary

Page 20 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 Existence of a secondary Twitter number of tweets Github code prior ICO Website active on May, 2020

Page 21 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 This is due to a similar allocation of successful and unsuccessful projects, regardless of the value of this variable. The prices of cryptocurrencies, namely, Bitcoin and Ethereum, seem to be inversely related to the project’s success. Whereas a cheaper price for Bitcoin is related to more successful projects, the opposite occurs with Ethereum, which tends to have more suc- cessful projects when its price is higher. The variables related to the use of social net- works tended to influence project success. Having an active Twitter account during the ICO campaign is associated with successful projects (32%), in contrast to not having an active Twitter campaign (15%), and having more followers is linked to successful pro- jects (32%), in contrast to having smaller networks (16%). The number of tweets does not allow for a clear analysis because of the percentages obtained. Although at a much smaller scale, we also confirm that having an active GitHub account is linked to greater success (28%) than not having one (19%). Having code publicly available before the start of the ICO campaign is not confirmed as having a strong relationship with success, con- trary to the existence of an active website, because more projects are considered success- ful when they have one (30%) than when they do not (17%). Finally, the team variables considered relevant to a project’s success are the number of team elements and LinkedIn networks. Larger teams and networks have higher percentages of successful projects (29% for both) than the opposite (18% and 19%, respectively). As shown in Table  3, significant discrepancies were found in the whitepaper word count. There were whitepapers with zero words because they were not found or did not exist, and there were whitepapers with as many as 88,211 words. The mean value was 6,465 words. The same happens with data concerning restricted countries, which can range from zero to 124, with a small mean for the two countries. To normalize the data, we rescaled several variables using log transformation. We also developed a frequency table for binary variables, as shown in Table 4. We can verify that, although balanced, most whitepapers do not disclose the team (52%), and the large majority are not technical (80%). The predominant region for a project’s location was Although the majority of the projects included pre-sales of tokens (54%), most of them had no bonus scheme (55%). In terms of variables related to the use of social networks, we verified that most projects had an active campaign on Twitter (59%). The projects Existence of a secondary

Page 22 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 with a GitHub account represent 51% of the sample, and only 36% of them had pub- licly available code prior to the ICO campaign. Currently, 56% of projects have active After performing a correlation and VIF analysis,1 we confirmed that there were no col- linearity issues. As previously discussed in the methodology section, we discarded four variables that showed high VIF values (higher than 10), which could compromise the analysis, particularly concerning the model regressed with the standard OLS method. These variables were clearly correlated among them, namely, the ratings attributed to different aspects of the project, Twitter profile followers, and following of the project. After reducing the number of variables, we obtained VIF values with a mean of 1.90. We started by regressing the econometric model with the dependent logarithmic vari- able (log of the total capital obtained) using the standard OLS method2 and, due to data limitations, regressed a second model using the robust regression in STATA. As expected, we obtained very similar results, regardless of the method used. Although the R-squared and adjusted R-squared measures are not the most appropriate for applica- tion to a robust regression, we present them and use them because they are consistent with the values obtained when the standard OLS method was used. We obtained a final R-squared of 0.32 for the OLS model and 0.33 for the robust regression, as well as a final adjusted R-squared of 0.28 for the OLS model and 0.29 for the robust regression. These measures increase with the inclusion of further independent variables that progressively contribute to the variance of the dependent variable. Along with the inclusion of new variables in both models, the already existing ones keep their significance and new ones are added, which can also be considered statistically significant. Furthermore, we devel- oped three logistic regressions with dependent binary variables: (i) a binary variable measuring the achievement of the soft-cap threshold, (ii) a binary variable measuring the Table 3  Descriptive statistics Twitter: number of tweets log 1  Detailed results are available from the authors upon request. 2  Detailed results available from the authors upon request.

Page 23 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 Github code prior ICO Website active on May, 2020

Page 24 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 achievement of the hard-cap threshold, and (iii) a binary variable measuring the exist- ence of a secondary market. The results are listed in Table 5. In the first two models, the results are consistent in terms of the statistical significance of the variables and coefficients. We obtain statistical significance for the following pro- ject variables: (i) whitepaper (team disclosed) and (ii) whitepaper (technical). The cam- paign variables considered significant are as follows: (i) bonus scheme, (ii) token price, (iii) Bitcoin price, and (iv) Ethereum price. Concerning the social network variables, the ones considered significant are: (i) Twitter active during the ICO campaign and (ii) Twitter number of followers. The team variable considered significant was the number of team members. Although statistically insignificant, we would like to highlight the importance of Twitter activity measured by the number of Tweets, since, as in the litera- ture, we found that extremely active Twitter accounts, which put pressure on investors, may contribute negatively to project success. Even though there are some discrepancies between the results of Models 3 and 4, there are variables that retain their strong statistical significance in all the models: (i) whitepaper technical, (ii) bitcoin price, and (iii) number of Twitter followers (except for Model 4). Model 2 provides an interesting conclusion regarding the length of the white- paper, revealing that it contributes to the project’s success, mainly due to the amount of information included, which is important for reducing information asymmetries. Model 4 contributes to the discussion by revealing the importance of locations concerning projects located in Europe. Models 3 and 4 prove to be statistically significant for the variable measuring the existence of pre-sales and reveal its negative impact on the suc- cess of a project. It is important to highlight that the coefficients are consistent among the models, but it was not possible to maintain similar results regarding the statistical We built on systems theory and signaling theory as a theoretical background for the current research. The ICO projects were interpreted in light of the theoretical frame- work proposed by both theories. It was found that the ICO projects operate as a system, particularly as an open system (Geiger et al. 2011a), which develops relationships with others within the same environment (Doan et al. 2011). The exchange of information is crucial in this particular framework, and the subsequent feedback allows the system to adapt correctly (Bertalanffy 1968). However, the exchange of information is of greater importance in markets with high information asymmetries between entrepreneurs and investors (Spence 1973). As the ICO market is characterized by such asymmetries (Momtaz 2019), the creation of quality signals by the project’s promoters that certify the quality of their venture becomes even more important. These signals and feedback are exchanged in this supra-system relationship (Geiger et al. 2011a) and can, ultimately, lead to a successful project capable of obtaining higher financing amounts (Fisch 2019). To assess the factors influencing the success of a project, we defined the most appropriate measure as the total capital raised by a given venture (Fisch 2019; Šapkauskienė and Višinskaitė 2020). Thus, we first regressed a model using the stand- ard OLS method and, thereafter, a model using a robust regression method, owing to

Page 25 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 Table 5  Econometric models Dependent variable: capital raised in USD log Dependent variable: binary variable of soft-cap achievement

Page 26 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 Twitter number of tweets Github code prior ICO Website active on May,

Page 27 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 Dependent variable: Binary Variable of Hard-cap Achievement Dependent variable: binary variable for the existence of a secondary market Whitepaper: word count log Twitter number of tweets log

Page 28 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 Github code prior ICO Website active on May, 2020 Significance levels: p < 0.01 (***); p < 0.05 (**); p < 0.1 (*)

Page 29 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 data limitations. The results were identical regardless of the method used. We further expanded our analysis by building three additional models using a logistic regression, for which the dependent variables were: (i) a binary variable measuring the achieve- ment of the soft-cap threshold (de Jong et al. 2018); (ii) a binary variable measuring the achievement of the hard-cap threshold; (iii) a binary variable measuring the exist- ence of a secondary market (Amsden and Schweizer, 2019). These measures may also be considered as accurate measures of success, especially the binary variable measur- ing the achievement of the soft-cap threshold. The soft-cap threshold is the minimum amount that the project is willing to take, in order to proceed. Therefore, it is consid- ered that a project can start after this goal is achieved. Regarding the achievement of the hard-cap threshold, the logic behind it is similar to the achievement of the soft- cap threshold. Nevertheless, this is the maximum amount a project is willing to take, and it does not necessarily need to achieve it to be considered successful. The trad- ability of the token in a secondary market is also considered desirable and a sign of a project’s success. Nonetheless, a project might not need to have its token traded in a secondary market for it to be considered successful. Consequently, we find the most suitable measure for the success of a project to be the total capital raised, similar to the achievement of the minimum soft-cap threshold established. The results were similar in the models using the total capital raised and soft-cap achievement as the dependent variables. The same happens for the models using the hard-cap achievement and the existence of a secondary market. Although the coef- ficients remain stable regardless of the dependent variable used, the statistical signifi- Regardless of the model used, we confirmed that the whitepaper has become a cru- cial part of ICO projects, in order to reduce information asymmetry. We conclude that the length of the whitepaper can positively help inform investors about the pro- ject, as confirmed in Model 3. Investors tend to pay closer attention to the content of the whitepaper (Adhami et al. 2018), such as the disclosure of team members and technical details (Feng et al. 2019; Fisch 2019). These two variables have positive coef- ficients, and the variable measuring the technicality of the whitepaper is approved in all models. The variable measuring the disclosure of the team was approved in the Our conclusions do not confirm the argument that bonus schemes negatively affect project success. In our analysis, we have a positive influence of bonus schemes for ICOs in the banking/financial sector in the first model. Furthermore, our analysis reveals that higher token prices are linked to more successful projects. Our research suggests that investors prefer more expensive tokens with bonus schemes that allow them to overcome higher prices, which are perceived as a signal of good quality. As per our analysis, cheaper tokens are less successful and can be considered as scams, while the opposite occurs with higher token prices. We confirmed the dependency of ICO projects on the cryptocurrency market. The prices of cryptocurrencies are also linked to a project’s success, as confirmed in our research and in the literature (Myalo and Glukhov 2019). We found a negative impact of higher prices of Bitcoin on project success (confirmed in all models). On the contrary, higher Ethereum prices meant more successful projects (not confirmed in the last two

Page 30 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 models). As most ventures are Ethereum-based (Fenu et al. 2018), the appreciation of cryptocurrency might influence investors perception of an ICO as a good investment. Our research also shows a relationship between the use of Twitter and a project’s out- come. Having an active ICO campaign on Twitter has a strong impact on the project’s success, as well as the network of followers being a way of reducing information asym- metries and keeping potential investors informed (Burns and Moro 2018; Cerchiello et al. 2019; Fisch 2019; Xuan et al. 2020). The literature indicates that larger teams tend to be more successful (Ante 2018; Amsden and Schweizer 2019; Cerchiello et al. 2019; Giudici and Adhami 2019; Liu and Wang 2019; Roosenboom et al. 2020). We were also able to confirm this with our analysis in Model 1, revealing that larger teams have more chances to be heterogeneous and have more diverse inputs, creating valuable human In conclusion, this research was able to confirm both the proposed hypotheses. The first hypothesis, which states that the quality signals provided by the project promoters to the investors in the open system relationships contribute positively to the outcome of a project, is confirmed by the statistical significance and coefficients of several variables in the econometric model. For instance, we confirm that the signal of expensive tokens complemented by a bonus scheme attracts investors, as does the existence of a larger and heterogeneous team capable of producing positive results when compared to small and homogeneous teams. The second hypothesis, which states that projects that provide higher levels of quality information are more successful, is also supported by the analysis of whitepaper and social network variables. Consequently, the projects that disclose the most information in the whitepaper and have comprehensive documents are more likely to succeed. Similarly, projects that continuously inform stakeholders through social networks (being active during the campaign) and keep them engaged (measured by the number of followers) are also more capable of achieving positive results. The findings of our study contribute to the literature on ICO projects. We were able to assemble a database and test most of the variables concerning the success factors of ICOs mentioned in the literature. We confirmed several aspects present in the litera- ture, but also obtained different results, thereby contributing to a wider discussion. Our research reported here, based on a considerably large database of blockchain projects and the use of theory, makes our contribution unique in the literature. Furthermore, this research has elaborated on systems theory and signaling theory. These theoretical backgrounds were adapted to the blockchain-based projects, and we were able to confirm that ICOs are open systems operating in an environment with several other systems that interact among them. The importance of feedback and the exchange of information is crucial in systems with these characteristics. Nevertheless, the ICO markets are characterized by information asymmetries between project pro- moters and investors, which can lead to flawed markets. This is why providing quality signals, here described as success factors, created by the project and sent to investors, We were able to prove that the two theories we used are relevant in the context of ICOs and that further analysis on them should account for the theoretical foundations

Page 31 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 analyzed here. Thus, the findings of this study uniquely contribute to the literature by using and interconnecting the two theories and adapting them to innovative blockchain projects. This provides ICO projects with an appropriate theoretical framework for their Our research is also important for regulators, mainly regarding our conclusions con- cerning whitepapers. Initial coin offering projects are highly unregulated, but because of the amount of money involved and the importance they have acquired, regulators need to pay closer attention to them. As the current risks of blockchain projects involve security and fraud, regulators should focus on measures supporting transparency and accountability to avoid fraud and crime (Frizzo-Barker et al. 2019). The whitepaper has been a way of reducing the lack of information in ICO projects and works as a self-reg- ulated prospectus with crucial information on the project. As per our research, there is strong evidence that a professional whitepaper that discloses important information is essential to the project’s success. These conclusions might be important in guiding For the promoters of ICO projects, the implications of this research are mainly related to investors’ perceptions of the project and the aspects promoters should pay particular attention to when promoting their ideas. We reinforce some of the conclusions found in the literature and add new insights that can be important in determining a project’s outcome. Indeed, a project promoter should, for instance, focus on having a detailed whitepaper, in which the team is disclosed and some technical details are highlighted. Furthermore, the project’s timing should be selected to take advantage of cryptocur- rency prices, the campaign should be as short as possible, and social networks should be well-managed. In summary, the ICO project’s promoters should take advantage of the messages presented in the literature to control all the factors that can obtain the best The database used for this research originally comprised 558 ICO projects, but some had to be discarded due to lack of information, leaving 428 projects for analysis. The database included only projects in the banking/financial sectors and may, therefore, not be generalizable to other industries. We also removed some of the variables collected because of their collinearity levels. It would be valuable to keep these variables in future studies, in order to clearly observe their behavior. Concerning Twitter and GitHub activ- ity, we faced an issue with inactive or blocked accounts. Although the number was not enough to compromise the research, we point out the fact that, in some cases, we were not able to collect information on social platform activity, due to the current unavail- ability of the account. The same issue occurred with some projects’ whitepapers, which we could not find, even by searching several platforms dedicated to ICOs and on the We collected information on the ratings attributed to the project, namely, project rat- ing, vision rating, and team rating. We were not able to use all of these factors because of their degree of collinearity. We decided to remove all these variables because we could

Page 32 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 not be certain of the time when they were attributed. The ratings are usually attributed before the ICO starts and are updated throughout the campaign and again after it is concluded. Although we are confident of their correct usage in the model, we could not ensure that they were completely unbiased and we, therefore, decided to exclude them. In our preliminary analysis, we concluded that the ratings for the team, project, and product had a positive impact on project success, and the rating for the vision had a negative impact on the project. This is due to the fact that visionary projects tend to be more difficult to achieve and harder to understand, creating a barrier for investment (Gompers and Lerner 2001). Other studies have confirmed this conclusion (Fenu et al. 2018; Rhue 2018; Lee et al. 2019; Xuan et al. 2020). A final limitation identified in this research concerns the inclusion of variables meas- uring the achievement of soft-cap and hard-cap thresholds. To keep the same sample used for the remaining models, we considered the value 0 for the projects that did not establish fundraising thresholds. Their exclusion would reduce the sample, as sev- eral projects do not define financing thresholds, and after regressing the model with a reduced sample, we concluded that the results remain consistent with those obtained when using the entire sample collected. Avenues for future research There are many avenues for future research in ICO projects because of the novelty of the topic and several unexplored features. After performing the current research, we found that some variables have a strong impact on project success, for instance, the whitepa- per. For future studies, it would be interesting to isolate these variables and focus on their effects. Regarding the whitepaper, it would be interesting to analyze its smallest aspects to understand what is most important. Furthermore, we confirmed that the sec- ondary market is of great importance. Therefore, it is important to analyze the behavior of tokens in the secondary market in terms of volatility, tradability, returns for inves- tors, and many other factors. Concerning the database, it would be useful to construct a wider database and cluster it by the project’s industry before determining the most suc- cessful industry and confirming the success factors that are transversal to industries or those that apply to only one specific industry. Building on OST and signaling theory, future studies might focus on the sub-system relationships, that is, those between projects, to determine if there is any degree of cooperation and the extent to which cooperation is useful. It would also be interesting to analyze the relationships within the project, such as human relationships, aspects of corporate governance, or the way feedback is processed for the correct adaptation of the system (Mele et al. 2010). The authors are grateful for the support of Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (FCT) who provided the funds neces- sary for the final review of the research. Research design: This research performs a literature review on the Initial Coin Offerings (ICOs) topic and compiles the general success factors of these projects. It adopts a quantitative approach based on the development of an economet- ric model using a database composed of 428 ICO projects collected via an API. Conceptualization: JC, AB, RA. Methodology: JC, AB, RA. Formal analysis: JC. Resources: AB, AR. Data Curation: JC, AB, AR. Visualization: JC. Writing—Original Draft: JC. Writing—Review and Editing: JC, AB, AR. All authors read and approved the

Page 33 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 This work was supported by Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia, grant UIDB/00315/2020. Availability of data and materials The datasets used and/or analyzed in the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 1 Instituto Universitário de Lisboa (ISCTE-IUL), Business Research Unit (BRU-IUL), Lisbon, Portugal. 2 Instituto Universitário de Lisboa (ISCTE-IUL), DINÂMIA’CET, Lisbon, Portugal. Received: 1 April 2021 Accepted: 14 November 2021 Ackermann E, Bock C, Bürger R (2020) Democratising entrepreneurial finance: the impact of crowdfunding and initial coin offerings (ICOs). In: Moritz A, Block JH, Golla S, Werner A (eds) Contemporary developments in entrepreneurial finance. Springer, Cham, pp 277–308. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​030-​17612-9 Adhami S, Giudici G, Martinazzi S (2018) Why do businesses go crypto? an empirical analysis of initial coin offerings. J Econ Bus 100:64–75. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jecon​bus.​2018.​04.​001 Ahmad MF, Kowalewski O, Pisany P (2020) What determines initial coin offering success: a cross-country study. In: IÉSEG working paper series 2020-ACF-10. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2139/​ssrn.​37358​89 Albrecht S, Lutz B, Neumann D (2019) The behavior of blockchain ventures on Twitter as a determinant for funding suc- cess. Electron Mark. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s12525-​019-​00371-w Allison TH, Davis BC, Webb JW, Short JC (2017) Persuasion in crowdfunding: an elaboration likelihood model of crowd- funding performance. J Bus Ventur 32:707–725. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jbusv​ent.​2017.​09.​002 Amsden R, Schweizer D (2019) Are blockchain crowdsales the new “Gold Rush”? success determinants of initial coin offer- An J, Duan T, Hou W, Xu X (2019) Initial coin offerings and entrepreneurial finance: the role of founders’ characteristics. J Altern Invest 21:26–40. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3905/​jai.​2019.1.​068 Ante L, Sandner P, Fiedler I (2018) Blockchain-based ICOs: pure hype or the dawn of a new era of startup financing? J Risk Al-Omoush KS, Simón-Moya V, Sendra-García J (2020) The impact of social capital and collaborative knowledge crea- tion on e-business proactiveness and organizational agility in responding to the COVID-19 crisis. J Innov Knowl Beaton AE, Tukey JW (1974) The fitting of power series, meaning polynomials, illustrated on band-spectroscopic data. Benedetti H, Kostovetsky L (2018) Digital tulips? returns to investors in initial coin offerings. SSRN, https://​doi.​org/​10.​ Biasi J, Chakravorti S (2019) The future of cryptotokens. In: Disruptive innovation in business and finance in the digital world, pp 167–187. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​S1569-​37672​01900​00020​018 Blaseg D (2018) Dynamics of voluntary disclosure in the unregulated market for initial coin offerings. SSRN. https://​doi.​ Block JH, Groh A, Hornuf L, Vanacker T, Vismara S (2020) The entrepreneurial finance markets of the future: a comparison of crowdfunding and initial coin offerings. Small Bus Econ. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11187-​020-​00330-2 Boreiko D, Risteski D (2020) Serial and large investors in initial coin offerings. Small Bus Econ. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​ Bourveau T, George ET, Ellahie A, Macciocchi D (2018) Initial coin offerings: early evidence on the role of disclosure in the unregulated crypto market. Retrieved from https://​www.​marsh​all.​usc.​edu/​sites/​defau​lt/​files/​2019-​03/​thomas_​ Brochado A (2018) Snapshot das initial coin offerings (ICOs). In: CMVM (ed) Cadernos do Mercado de Valores Mobiliários, Burns L, Moro A (2018) What makes an ICO successful? an investigation of the role of ICO characteristics, team quality and market sentiment. SSRN, https://​doi.​org/​10.​2139/​ssrn.​32565​12 Campino J, Brochado A, Rosa Á (2020) Digital business transformation in the banking sector. In: Andraz G, Carrasqueira H, Pereira R, Baleiro R (eds) Dynamic strategic thinking for improved competitiveness and performance. IGI Global, Catalini C, Gans JS (2018) Initial coin offerings and the value of crypto tokens. MIT Sloan School of Management. https://​

Page 34 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 Cerchiello P, Tasca P, Toma AM (2019) ICOs success drivers: a textual and statistical analysis. J Altern Invest. https://​doi.​org/​ Chanson M, Gjoen J, Risius M, Wortmann F (2018) Initial coin offerings (ICOs): the role of social media for organizational legitimacy and underpricing. In: International conference on information systems. San Francisco: ICIS. Retrieved Charlotte S-HW, Sung H-C, Cheng T-C (2019) Measuring ICO performance indicators: an empirical study via white papers. In: IEEE international conference on blockchain and cryptocurrency (ICBC). IEEE, Seoul. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ Chen RR, Chen K (2020) A 2020 perspective on Information asymmetry in initial coin offerings (ICOs): investigating the effects of multiple channel signals. Electron Commer Res Appl. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​elerap.​2020.​100936 Chen Y (2018) Blockchain tokens and the potential democratization of entrepreneurship and innovation. Bus Horiz Chod J, Lyandres E (2020) A theory of ICOs: diversification, agency, and information asymmetry. SSRN. https://​doi.​org/​10.​ Christensen I, Karlsson C (2019) Open innovation and the effects of Crowdsourcing in a pharma ecosystem. J Innov Davies WE, Giovannetti E (2018) Signalling experience & reciprocity to temper asymmetric information in crowdfunding evidence from 10,000 projects. Technol Forecast Soc Chang. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2018.​03.​011 de Jong A, Roosenboom P, van der Kolk T (2018) What determines success in initial coin offerings? SSRN. https://​doi.​org/​ Doan A, Ramakrishnan R, Halevy AY (2011) Crowdsourcing systems on the world-wide-web. Commun ACM 54(4):86–96. Domingo R-S, Piñeiro-Chousa J, López-Cabarcos MÁ (2020) What factors drive returns on initial coin offerings? Technol Forecast Soc Chang 153:119915. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2020.​119915 Emery FE, Trist EL (1965) The causal texture of organizational environments. Hum Relat 18(21):21–32. https://​doi.​org/​10.​ Feng C, Li N, Wong MF, Zhang M (2019) Initial coin offerings, blockchain technology, and white paper disclosures. SSRN. Fenu G, Marchesi L, Marchesi M, Tonelli R (2018) The ICO phenomenon and its relationships with ethereum smart contract environment. In: 2018 International workshop on blockchain oriented software engineering (IWBOSE). Fisch C (2019) Initial coin offerings (ICOs) to finance new ventures. J Bus Ventur 34:1–22. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jbusv​ Frizzo-Barker J, Chow-White PA, Adams PR, Mentanko J, Ha D, Green S (2019) Blockchain as a disruptive technology for business: A systematic review. Int J Inf Manag. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​ijinf​omgt.​2019.​10.​014 Geiger D, Rosemann M, Fielt E (2011) Crowdsourcing information systems: a systems theory perspective. In: 22nd Aus- tralasian conference on information systems. Sydney: ACIS. http://​eprin​ts.​qut.​edu.​au/​47466/ Geiger D, Seedorf S, Schulze T, Nickerson R, Schader M (2011) Managing the crowd: towards a taxonomy of crowdsourc- ing processes. In: Seventeenth Americas conference on information systems. AMCIS, Detroit, pp 1–11. Retrieved Giudici G, Adhami S (2019) The impact of governance signals on ICO fundraising success. J Ind Bus Econ 46:283–312. Gompers PA, Lerner J (2001) The money of invention: how venture capital creates new wealth. Harvard Business School Greenberg MD, Hariharan K, Gerber E, Pardo B (2013) Crowdfunding support tools: predicting success and failure. In: CHI ’13 extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems. Association for Computing Machinery, pp Grossman SJ (1981) The informational role of warranties and private disclosure about product quality. J Law Econ 24(3):461–483 Hacker P, Thomale C (2018) Crypto-securities regulation: ICOs, token sales and cryptocurrencies under EU financial law. Eur Co Financ Law Rev 15:645–696. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2139/​ssrn.​30758​20 Hartmann F, Grottolo G, Wang X, Lunesu MI (2019) Alternative fundraising: success factors for blockchain-based vs conventional crowdfunding. In: Blockchain oriented software engineering (IWBOSE), pp 38–43. https://​doi.​org/​10.​ Hilbe J, Anagnoson JT, DeLeon R, Geiger P, Goldstein R, West S (1991) A publication to promote communication among Stata users. In: Stata Technical Bulletin. Retrieved from https://​pdfs.​seman​ticsc​holar.​org/​78f6/​f5e42​0db89​bda79​ Howell S, Niessner M, Yermack D (2018) Initial coin offerings: financing growth with cryptocurrency token sales. In: NBER Working Paper Series, pp 1–64. Retrieved from https://​ssrn.​com/​abstr​act=​32064​49 Huang W, Meoli M, Vismara S (2020) The geography of initial coin offerings. Small Bus Econ 55:77–102. https://​doi.​org/​10.​ Huber PJ (1964) Robust estimation of a location parameter. Ann Math Stat 35:73–101. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1214/​aoms/​ Milgrom PR (1981) Good news and bad news: representation theorems and applications. Bell J Econ 12(2):380–391 Katz D, Kahn RL (1979) The social psychology of organizations. Soc Forces 57(4):1413–1415. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​sf/​57.4.​1413 Kou G, Akdeniz ÖO, Dinçer H, Yüksel S (2021) Fintech investments in European banks: a hybrid IT2 fuzzy multidimensional decision-making approach. Financ Innov. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s40854-​021-​00256-y Kou G, Peng Y, Wang G (2014) Evaluation of clustering algorithms for financial risk analysis using MCDM methods. Inf Sci

Page 35 of 35 Campino et al. Financial Innovation (2022) 8:17 Kranz J, Nagel E, Yoo Y (2019) Blockchain token sale: economic and technological foundations. Bus Inf Syst Eng 61:745– Lee J, Li T, Shin D (2019) The wisdom of crowds in FinTech: evidence from initial coin offerings. SSRN. https://​doi.​org/​10.​ Leland HE, Pyle DH (1977) Informational asymmetries, financial structure, and financial intermediation. J Finance 32(2):371–387 Li G (1985) Robust regression. In: Hoaglin DC, Mosteller F, Turkey J (eds) Exploring data tables, trends, and shapes. Wiley, Liu C, Wang H (2019) Initial coin offerings: what do we know and what are the success factors? In: S. Goutte, K. Guesmi, S. Saadi (eds) Cryptofinance and mechanisms of exchange. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​030-​30738-7 López-Cabarcos MÁ, Ribeiro-Soriano D, Pineiro-Chousa J (2020) All that glitters is not gold. The rise of gaming in the COVID-19 pandemic. J Innov Knowl 5:289–296. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jik.​2020.​10.​004 Lyandres E, Palazzo B, Rabetti D (2019) Do tokens behave like securities? an anatomy of initial coin offerings. SSRN. Mamonov S, Malaga R (2018) Success factors in Title III equity crowdfunding in the United States. Electron Commer Res Mele C, Pels J, Polese F (2010) A brief review of systems theories and their managerial applications. Serv Sci 2:126–135 Momtaz PP (2019) Entrepreneurial finance and moral hazard: evidence from token offerings. J Bus Ventur. https://​doi.​org/​ Momtaz PP (2020a) Initial coin offerings, asymmetric information, and loyal CEOs. Small Bus Econ. https://​doi.​org/​10.​ Momtaz PP (2020) Initial coin offerings. PLOS ONE 15:e0233018. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​02330​18 Myalo A, Glukhov N (2019) Success of initial coin offering. The empirical evidence from 2016–2019. SSRN. https://​doi.​org/​ OECD (2019) Initial coin offerings (ICOs) for SME financing. Retrieved from https://​www.​oecd.​org/​finan​ce/​initi​al-​coin-​ Ofir M, Sadeh I (2019) ICO vs IPO: empirical findings, information asymmetry and the appropriate regulatory framework. Vanderbilt J Transnatl Law. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2139/​ssrn.​33380​67 Pazos J (2019) Valuation method of equity-based security token offerings (STO) for start-up companies. J Brit Blockchain Pereza C, Sokolova K, Konate M (2020) Digital social capital and performance of initial coin offerings. Technol Forecast Soc Ralcheva A, Roosenboom P (2016) On the road to success in equity crowdfunding. SSRN. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2139/​ssrn.​27277​42 Rhue L (2018) Trust is all you need: an empirical exploration of initial coin offerings (ICOs) and ICO reputation scores. Roosenboom P, Kolk TV, Jong AD (2020) What determines success in initial coin offerings?. Venture Capital https://​doi.​ Šapkauskienė A, Višinskaitė I (2020) Initial coin offerings (ICOs): benefits, risks and success measures. Entrep Sustain Issues Spence M (1973) Job market signalling. Q J Econ 87:355–374. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2307/​18820​10 Wooldridge JM (2013) Introductory econometrics: a modern approach, 5th edn. South-Western, Cengage Learning Xuan M, Zhu X, Zhao JL (2020) Impact of social media on fundraising success in initial coin offering (ICO): an empirical investigation. In: Pacific Asia conference on information systems (PACIS). Dubai, pp 6–22. Retrieved from https://​ Yadav M (2017) Exploring signals for investing in an initial coin offering (ICO). SSRN. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2139/​ssrn.​30371​06 Yuryev G (2018) What can explain the performance of initial coin offerings? Retrieved from https://​uis.​brage.​unit.​no/​uis-​ Zha Q, Kou G, Zhang H, Liang H, Chen X, Li C-C, Dong Y (2020) Opinion dynamics in finance and business: a literature review and research opportunities. Financ Innov 6(44):1–22. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s40854-​020-​00211-3 Bertalanffy LV (1968) General system theory: foundations, development, applications. George Brazillier, New York Skyttner L (2005) General systems theory: problems, perspectives, practice, 2nd edn. World Scientific, London Wilson C (1989) Adverse selection. In: Eatwell J, Milgate M, Newman P (eds) Allocation, information and markets. Palgrave Massey R, Dalal D, Dakshinamoorthy A (2017) Initial coin offering: a new paradigm. Deloitte. https://​www2.​deloi​tte.​com/​ conte​nt/​dam/​Deloi​tte/​ru/​Docum​ents/​risk/​deloi​tte-​block​chain-​initi​al-​coin-​offer​ing.​pdf. Accessed 21 January 2021 STATA (2020a, May 14) Stata 16 documentation. Retrieved from STATA: https://​www.​stata.​com/​manua​ls13/​rskte​st.​pdf STATA (2020b, May 14) Stata 16 documentation. Retrieved from STATA: https://​www.​stata.​com/​manua​ls13/​rrreg.​pdf STATA (2020c) Stata 16 documentation. https://​www.​stata.​com/​manua​ls13/​rlogit.​pdf. Accessed 21 January 2021 Williams R (2020, January 10) Richard Williams, Department of Sociology, University of Notre Dame. Retrieved from Coinschedule (2020, January 22) Coinschedule. Retrieved from https://​www.​coins​chedu​le.​com/ Google (2020, January 27) Google Trends. Retrieved from https://​trends.​google.​com/ ICOBench (2020, January 1) ICO Bench. Retrieved from https://​icobe​nch.​com Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

---NEW PAPER---

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Survival prediction models: an introduction to discrete-time modeling , Cameron Severn2 and Debashis Ghosh1 Background: Prediction models for time-to-event outcomes are commonly used in biomedical research to obtain subject-specific probabilities that aid in making important clinical care decisions. There are several regression and machine learning methods for building these models that have been designed or modified to account for the censoring that occurs in time-to-event data. Discrete-time survival models, which have often been overlooked in the literature, provide an alternative approach for predictive modeling in the presence of censoring with limited loss in predictive accuracy. These models can take advantage of the range of nonparametric machine learning classification algorithms and their available software to predict survival outcomes. Methods: Discrete-time survival models are applied to a person-period data set to predict the hazard of experiencing the failure event in pre-specified time intervals. This framework allows for any binary classification method to be applied to predict these conditional survival probabilities. Using time-dependent performance metrics that account for censoring, we compare the predictions from parametric and machine learning classification approaches applied within the discrete time-to-event framework to those from continuous-time survival prediction models. We outline the process for training and validating discrete-time prediction models, and demonstrate its application using the open-source R statistical programming environment. Results: Using publicly available data sets, we show that some discrete-time prediction models achieve better prediction performance than the continuous-time Cox proportional hazards model. Random survival forests, a machine learning algorithm adapted to survival data, also had improved performance compared to the Cox model, but was sometimes outperformed by the discrete-time approaches. In comparing the binary classification methods in the discrete time-to-event framework, the relative performance of the different methods varied depending on the data set. Conclusions: We present a guide for developing survival prediction models using discrete-time methods and assessing their predictive performance with the aim of encouraging their use in medical research settings. These methods can be applied to data sets that have continuous time-to-event outcomes and multiple clinical predictors. They can also be extended to accommodate new binary classification algorithms as they become available. We provide R code for fitting discrete-time survival prediction models in a github repository. Keywords: Cox proportional hazards, Machine learning, Random survival forest, Time-to-event 1Department of Biostatistics and Informatics, Colorado School of Public Health, Full list of author information is available at the end of the article © The Author(s). 2022 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 2 of 18 Survival prediction models are often used at some base- line time, such as time of diagnosis or treatment, to answer questions such as “What is the probability that this patient will be alive in 5 years, given their baseline covariate infor- mation?” This predicted probability can then be used by clinicians to make important decisions regarding patient care, such as increasing monitoring frequency or imple- menting particular therapies. Survival prediction models are built using time-to-event data, which includes the time that an individual is observed for the event of interest and whether they experience the event at the end of that follow-up time. For some individuals, we do not observe the event of interest during their follow-up so we have incomplete information about these individuals. That is, we do not know when the event occurs but we know that it happens sometime after their observation period. These are considered to be censored observations, and to exclude or ignore this information when analyzing the data can lead to biased and inefficient predictions [1]. Thus, survival prediction models differ from traditional prediction models for continuous or binary outcomes by appropriately accommodating censoring that is present in There is a vast class of survival prediction models, rang- ing from those built using traditional regression methods to more recently developed machine learning algorithms [2]. The traditional approaches treat time-to-event as a continuous outcome and make parametric or semi- parametric assumptions about the distribution of the survival times. Parametric survival models assume a par- ticular distribution for the survival times (e.g., Weibull, exponential), which is often based on prior knowledge of the clinical or scientific context. These models can be more efficient and accurate when the survival times follow the assumed parametric distribution but can lead to biased estimates when misspecified [3]. The semi- parametric Cox proportional hazards model leaves the distribution of the survival times to be estimated using non-parametric methods, such as the Breslow estima- tor, but incorporates covariate effects so that individuals with different sets of predictors can have different pre- dicted survival curves [4]. The standard Cox model relies on a proportional hazards assumption for the survival times that when violated can lead to inaccurate predic- tions. This violation can be common in practice when there are time-varying covariate effects and unobserved An increasingly common approach to building sur- vival prediction models are machine learning (ML) algo- rithms that use mathematical procedures to model the relationships between covariates. Common ML algo- rithms for survival have been extended from those devel- oped for classification problems or traditional survival models and include penalized or boosted Cox regression [6, 7], random survival trees and forests [8–11], support vector methods [12, 13], and artificial neural networks [14–17]. The advantages of ML approaches are that they are algorithms designed for achieving optimal predic- tive performance, they do not require specification of covariate relationships, and they are able to capture com- plex and nonlinear relationships in the data. As well, unlike parametric and semi-parametric survival models, they do not make distributional or proportional hazards assumptions about the survival times. The disadvantages include lack of interpretability, computational intensity, and overfitting that results in poor external validation. In situations of high-dimensionality or complex covari- ate relationships, ML methods have been shown to have superior predictive performance compared to traditional regression-based approaches. However, in application to time-to-event data, machine learning algorithms can have mixed performance for predicting survival outcomes in comparison with Cox regression models [1, 18, 19]. Thus, the extent to which these machine learning approaches are necessary or useful may depend on the particular application and data set. The survival prediction models that we have described thus far are built using methods or algorithms for contin- uous time-to-event outcomes, while accommodating cen- sored observations. These include ML algorithms origi- nally built for classification or continuous outcomes that have been adapted to accommodate censoring. Unlike classification models that have been implemented in uni- fied R packages, such as ‘caret’ and ‘h2o’, survival pre- diction models are usually hosted in separate packages (e.g., ‘survival’, ‘fastcox’, ‘randomForestSRC’ in R) and often in different software (e.g., ‘PySurvival’ in Python) [20– 25]. Thus, to take advantage of the predictive power of existing ML classification algorithms and their available and unified software, we consider a class of discrete-time survival prediction models that are built using classifica- tion prediction models but are able to take into account In a discrete-time survival framework [26, 27], we can transform continuous survival time data into a discrete- time format using a person-period data set. Each indi- vidual’s follow-up time is split into a set of pre-specified, common time intervals, and their survival status is recorded for each of the intervals during which they are at risk (i.e., have not yet experienced the event of interest). The general idea of prediction using this discrete-time framework is to build models that predict the proba- bility of surviving each of these discrete-time intervals, which when treated as a binary outcome of experienc- ing an event within the interval can be framed as a series of binary classification problems. This discrete-time for- mulation of survival data is general such that any binary

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 3 of 18 classification method can be applied, allowing for a wide range of models to be considered. Traditional approaches fit a logistic regression model to this data [4, 27, 28]. However, these models require speci- fication of covariate relationships with outcomes, and thus knowledge of covariate interactions and behavior. Instead, we demonstrate the use of ML classification methods, such as random forest or neural networks, to predict the conditional survival probabilities for each of the intervals. Using these predictions, we can then compute our quan- tity of interest, which is an individual’s probability of sur- viving beyond a certain time. We present the process for building and testing a discrete-time survival model using this approach and demonstrate it using two publicly avail- able data sets. With these data, we compare the predictive performance of various classification approaches applied in the discrete-time framework and common survival prediction models, such as Cox regression and random The use of a discrete-time survival framework for pre- diction is not recent. ML classification algorithms applied to a discrete-time framework has been demonstrated using tree-based methods [29, 30] and neural networks [31–34]. However, the use of discrete-time survival for prediction is uncommon in clinical applications, with models built using continuous-time methods such as Cox proportional hazards (PH) or random survival forests being more popular. With the increasing interest in explo- ration of ML algorithms for predicting survival outcomes, a discrete time-to-event method using machine learning provides a potentially powerful and easily implementable alternative approach. This manuscript contributes to the existing literature by presenting a guide for the devel- opment and assessment of discrete-time survival models built using ML classification algorithms for survival pre- diction, and providing code for its implementation in R software. We demonstrate that there are settings in which these models can achieve superior predictive performance compared to continuous-time models, and thus should be considered as candidates in the development of survival This paper provides a demonstration for using discrete- time modeling for obtaining survival predictions in the context of time-to-event outcomes. We describe the methodology and application of binary classification models to predict conditional survival probabilities. We present the process for building and testing discrete-time prediction models. We additionally make available R code for implementing this process and for comparing the pre- dictive performance to common continuous-time survival models. The primary goal is to provide applied statisti- cians with resources for training and evaluating discrete- time prediction models to encourage their use in medical research for personalized decision-making. Structure of this paper This manuscript is presented as a tutorial for building survival prediction models using discrete-time model- ing. We assume the reader already has basic knowledge of survival analysis and predictive modeling. First, an introduction is given to prediction with machine learn- ing algorithms and prediction models built to accommo- date right-censored time-to-event data. Within this class of models, we present parametric survival models, the commonly used Cox proportional hazards model, and machine learning survival algorithms, such as the random survival forest. Second, we describe discrete-time survival modeling using binary classification models and how it can be used for prediction. Third, details are provided on two commonly used performance metrics for assessing survival prediction models, Area under the receiver oper- ating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC) and Brier score (BS). Fourth, we present a guide for building and validat- ing discrete-time prediction models. Using publicly avail- able data sets, we demonstrate our approach using code written for the R programming language [35]. Finally, we end with a discussion of the advantages of this approach and the opportunities it provides for future research. Machine learning and continuous-Time prediction Machine learning algorithms capture the relationships between covariates by solving mathematical procedures using numerical computation. The primary goal of build- ing a ML algorithm is prediction. These algorithms use iterative optimization techniques to flexibly model non- linear and complex relationships between covariates to minimize prediction error. This can make it difficult to then extract and interpret covariate effects and interac- tions from them. This is in contrast to the traditional statistical methods that are developed for inference and interpretability, but can be used for prediction as well. We consider the class of supervised ML algorithms, where we are interested in building a model using a set of covariates. We apply this trained model to a new sub- ject to obtain predictions. Thus, instead of interpretation, our goal is to build a model with superior predictive per- formance. We explore the application of machine learning algorithms in two ways. First, we consider survival ML algorithms that have been adapted to accommodate right- censored data, such as random survival forests. Second, we consider classification algorithms that predict a binary outcome that can be applied in a discrete-time framework. The purpose of exploring machine learning alternatives to traditional statistical methods in predicting survival is to

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 4 of 18 present an approach that is designed to achieve superior predictive performance and can therefore be reliably used in clinical decision-making. In Table 1, we briefly describe some commonly used ML algorithms, but readers that are interested in a detailed introduction to machine learning are referred to [36–40]. In the survival setting, the observed data is given by Dn = { ˜Ti, δi, Xi; i = 1, ..., n} where ˜Ti = min(Ti, Ci) is the observed event time for the ith subject (i = 1, ..., n), with Ti denoting the true event time, Ci the censoring time, δi = I(Ti ≤Ci) the event indicator, and Xi ≡(Xi1, ..., XiJ)′ the observed baseline covariate vector. We consider the common situation of a right-censored survival outcome, where if an individual’s observed survival time is censored we know only that they experienced the event beyond that time. We also assume independent or noninformative censoring conditional on covariates, such that Ti and Ci are independent random variables given Xi. A key quantity associated with time-to-event outcomes is the survival function, S(t) = Pr(T > t), which is a function of time, t, and is the probability of surviv- ing beyond that time. This function describes a patient’s survival curve during follow-up. For a patient k with pre- dictors Xk, the quantity of interest is then denoted by πk(t) = Pr(T > t|Xk). Another important characteris- tic of survival models is the hazard function, denoted h(t), which represents the instantaneous risk of experiencing Table 1 Machine learning methods Are an ensemble of tree-based learners that are built using bootstrap samples of the training data and average the predictions from the individuals trees. In constructing the trees, a random subset of features is selected for evaluating the split criterion at each node. This leads to de-correlated individual trees that can Are an ensemble of base learners that are constructed sequentially and are progressively reweighted to increase emphasis on observations with wrong predictions and high errors. Thus, the subsequent learners are more likely to correctly classify these misclassified observations. Uses a kernel function to map input features into high-dimensional feature spaces where classification (survival) can be described by a hyperplane. Provides a mathematical solution to applying regression methods to correlated features by using an ℓ2 penalty term (ridge). Additionally, can encourage sparsity by using an ℓ1 penalty (LASSO) to avoid overfitting and perform variable selection. A weighted combination of ℓ1 and ℓ2 penalties can be used to do both (elastic net). Are comprised of node layers starting with input layer representing the data features, that feeds into one or more hidden layers, and ends with an output layer that presents the final prediction. the event at time t, given that the individual has not expe- rienced the event up to that time. The hazard function is defined as h(t) = f (t)/S(t), where f (t) is the density func- tion for the observed event time. Additionally, we define the cumulative baseline hazard H(t) = 0 h(s)ds and can write the survival function as S(t) = exp{−H(t)}. Survival prediction models commonly predict a survival function from which we can directly obtain πk(t), or a prognostic index (e.g., the linear predictor) that can be transformed to obtain the survival distribution. In this section, we begin by describing some com- mon regression and ML approaches for building survival prediction models using parametric, semi-parametric, or Parametric survival models assume that the survival times follow a particular distribution that can be specified as a function with finite-dimensional parameters. One approach is to specify a particular distributional family for the survival time and then allow the parameters of that distribution to depend on covariates. Thus, the functional form for the model is completely specified while parame- ter values are unknown. For example, if we assume that the survival times were exponentially distributed, i.e., f (t) = λ exp{−λt} and h(t) = λ, we can let the rate parameter depend on covariates using λ = exp{βX}. Other paramet- ric families that are commonly considered for modeling survival times are Weibull, exponential, log-logistic, log- normal, and the generalized gamma [3]. Many parametric survival models (e.g., Weibull, expo- nential) are also accelerated failure time (AFT) models. That is, covariates have a multiplicative (i.e., proportional) effect on the survival time [3], and we assume that the relationship between the log of the survival time and the covariates is linear, i.e., log(T) = βX + σW, where σ is a scale parameter and W is an error term. Thus, the main difference between this class of models and linear regression methods applied directly to the event times is the inclusion of censored observations in the estima- tion procedure. The type of AFT model is determined by the distribution assumed for W (e.g., an extreme value distribution leads to a Weibull model for T). Alternatively, we can model survival data using a pro- portional hazards model. In contrast to AFT models, in PH models the covariate effects are multiplicative with respect to the hazard, rather than the survival. Thus, h(t) = h0(t) exp{βX}, where h0(t) is the baseline hazard (i.e., the hazard when the covariates are at their refer- ence level). The specific proportional hazards model is defined by the parametric form selected for the baseline hazard. If we assume the baseline hazard is exponential, i.e., h0(t) = λ, then the hazard is h(t) = λ exp{βX}, which is actually still an exponential model since the hazard is

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 5 of 18 constant. Similarly the Weibull baseline hazard results in a Weibull model. However, that is not the case for all distri- butions (e.g., a log-logistic baseline hazard does not result in a log-logistic PH model). Estimation for parametric survival models can be con- ducted using maximum likelihood estimation, which is implemented using the survreg function in the R soft- ware package ‘survival’ [22]. An advantage of these models is that in addition to predicting a patient’s survival prob- ability, we can also predict their survival time, which is not directly possible with the other survival models we will cover. As well, these models can be more efficient when the survival times follow a particular distribution. However, the disadvantage is that if the distribution is not correctly specified then results can be biased [3], which can affect predictive performance. Cox proportional hazards model We can instead consider the popular Cox PH model, which is a semi-parametric model where the distribution of the outcome is unknown. These models are not fully parametric since, while we specify regression parameters for the covariate effects, the baseline hazard (or baseline survival) is not specified. Thus, the Cox model is a gen- eralization of the parametric proportional hazards model. The advantage of the Cox model is that it does not rely on distributional assumptions for the survival times. In Cox PH models, the hazard function is modeled as h(t) = h0(t) exp{βX}, where β is a vector of regression coefficients and h0(t) is a nonparametric baseline haz- ard. The predicted survival probability of interest is then obtained from this model as πCox 0 h0(s)ds is the cumulative baseline hazard function. The β coefficients are estimated using maximum likelihood estimation of a partial log likeli- hood in which the baseline hazard h0(t) is left unspecified and treated as a nuisance function. The primary purpose of Cox regression is to identify association between risk factors and outcomes, and thus a second step must be taken to estimate the baseline hazard function required for prediction. The cumulative baseline hazard function H0(t) is estimated using a non-parametric method, most commonly the Breslow estimator. To estimate both the regression coefficients and the cumulative baseline hazard, we use the observed survival times T to identify risk sets, which are comprised of sub- jects still at risk of the event, at unique event times in the data set. Thus, the estimation depends on the order- ing of survival times rather than their specific values. If there are ties in the event times (e.g., if failure times are only reported to the nearest day), then the survival times cannot be uniquely sorted and an approximation of the partial likelihood function is required for estimation [3]. If there are many ties, then it may make more sense to treat the failure time distribution as discrete and use a discrete- time framework. For more details about the estimation of Cox PH models, see [3, 4]. Estimates of β and H0(t) are then plugged into πCox (t) to predict the individual’s prob- ability of surviving beyond time t. Estimation for a Cox PH model is implemented by the coxph function in the R package ‘survival’, and predictions from these models can be obtained using the predictCox function in the R Machine learning survival algorithms Several ML algorithms have been developed to handle censored time-to-event data. With these methods we can build survival prediction models for high-dimensional, complex data that can have greater accuracy than tra- ditional regression methods. Existing ML algorithms for survival include penalized Cox regression, boosted Cox regression, survival trees and random survival forests, support vector regression, and neural networks. These methods are extensions or adaptations to the ML algo- rithms presented in Table 1 and are described in further ML methods that are based on penalized or boosted Cox regression suffer from the same issues as the Cox PH model, in that they need a second step in software implementation to estimate the baseline hazard function for predicting survival probabilities and still rely on the proportional hazards assumption. Support vector regres- sion has been extended for survival analyses using two approaches: (i) ranking, which predicts the risk ranks between subjects, and (ii) regression, which predicts a subject’s survival time, both of which are considered in [13]. Neither of these support vector machine (SVM) approaches produces predictions that are related to the survival or cumulative hazard function, and thus cannot be used to obtain a predicted survival probability. Neu- ral networks for survival have expanded on the Cox PH model [14, 42, 43], but again only output a prognostic index and not the survival probability, thus requiring addi- tional estimation of the baseline hazard using the Breslow estimator. In this tutorial, to present a comparison to a ML method extended to accommodate censoring we focus on the commonly used approach for survival prediction, the Random survival forests are an ensemble method based on the bagging of survival trees [8]. A survival tree is a decision tree that is built by recursively splitting tree nodes based on a particular feature. Each split is made using a dissimilarity measure that computes the survival difference between the two new nodes and selects the best split as being the one that maximizes this survival differ- ence. This dissimilarity measure is often selected to be the

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 6 of 18 test statistic of the log rank test [8]. With random survival forests, we take b = 1, . . . , B bootstrap samples from the original data set. For each bootstrap sample b, we grow a survival tree, where for each node we consider a set of randomly selected p candidate predictors rather than the full set of predictors, and split the node on the predic- tor that maximizes the dissimilarity measure. We grow the survival tree until each terminal node has no fewer than d0 unique deaths. In each terminal node, we com- pute the conditional cumulative hazard function using the Nelson-Aalen estimator, a non-parametric estimator of the survival function, using the subjects that are in the bootstrap sample b whose predictors place them in that To obtain a prediction for an individual k with pre- dictors Xk, for the survival tree created using bootstrap sample b = 1, . . . , B we obtain the conditional cumula- tive hazard function of the terminal node that individual k belongs to based on their predictors, denoted H(b)(t|Xk). We then compute their ensemble cumulative hazard func- b=1 H(b)(t|Xk). The predicted survival probability of interest is then given by πRSF exp{−Hk(t)}. A random survival forest can be fit in R soft- ware using the ‘randomForestSRC’ package [24], which contains a predict function to compute predicted prob- abilities. This function allows the user to specify the rule used to determine the node split, and by default uses log- rank splitting [44]. It also requires the specification of hyperparameters, such as terminal node size (d0) and the number of variables to randomly select for each split (p), which can be optimally identified using hyperparameter The methods we have discussed so far are only applicable to continuous survival times. In the discrete-time frame- work, we assume that the available data is the same but we define the hazard function and the link between the hazard and survival functions differently. We divide the continuous survival time into a sequence of J contiguous time intervals (t0, t1] , (t1, t2] , . . . , (tJ−1, tJ], where t0 = 0. Within this framework the hazard, or instantaneous risk of the event, in a particular interval is the probability of an individual experiencing the event during that inter- val given that they have survived up to the start of that interval. So, in discrete time, the hazard is a conditional probability rather than a rate, and as such its value lies between zero and one. Thus, for an individual with base- line covariates Xi, the hazard in interval Aj = (tj−1, tj] can be expressed as the conditional probability λij(Xi) = Pr(Ti ∈Aj|Ti > tj−1, Xi) = Pr(tj−1 < Ti ≤tj|Ti > tj−1, Xi) and the discrete probability function is given by fij = Pr(Ti ∈Aj|Xi) = S(tj−1|Xi) −S(tj|Xi) The probability of surviving beyond a particular time t can be obtained as the product of the conditional sur- vival probabilities for all the time intervals up to and including (tj−1, tj], such that tj ≤t. This is analogous to specifying the survival function in continuous time as the integrated hazard over all previous times. Thus, the survival probability in discrete time is given by Si(t|Xi) = Pr(Ti > t|Xi) = Note that the relationship λij(Xi) = fij/Si(tj−1|Xi) still holds under these definitions. To construct the likelihood, subject i contributes the product of the conditional sur- vival probabilities for the time intervals in which they are observed but do not experience the event. Individuals that are observed to have a failure (i.e., δi = 1) additionally contribute the conditional failure probability in the inter- val Aji = (tji−1, tji] in which they experience the event of interest. We use ji to denote the last interval during which we have information about subject i, such that Ti ∈Aji. Subject i does not contribute any information to the like- lihood for intervals beyond Aji. Here, we only consider right-censoring, so the likelihood is given by where tji indicates that subject i has a survival time in interval (tji−1, tji]. We can introduce an event history indi- cator dij = I(Ti ∈Aji) = I(tj−1 < Ti ≤tj), which for cen- sored subjects is given by (di1, . . . , diji) = (0, . . . , 0) and for subjects that experience the event is (di1, . . . , diji) = (0, . . . , 0, 1). The likelihood can then be written as which is equivalent to the likelihood of a binomial model with independent observations dij, subject-specific proba- bilities λij(Xi) for subject i experiencing the event in inter- val (tj−1, tj], and time-fixed covariates Xi. Note that we do not make the assumption that the event indicators within a subject are independent and have a binomial distribu- tion. Instead, we observe that the likelihood function for the discrete-time survival model under non-informative censoring can be represented using a binomial likelihood that assumes independent event indicators [27]. To construct this likelihood from our data, we need to convert it into a person-period data set, as depicted in

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 7 of 18 Fig. 1. Subjects contribute a row for each time interval at which they are still at risk at the start, i.e., all j such that T > tj−1. Each record contains the subject’s failure indi- cator for experiencing the event during that interval (i.e., their event history indicator dij), a copy of their baseline covariate vector Xi, and a factor variable identifying the interval Aj to which the record corresponds. Due to the binomial structure of the likelihood func- tion in Eq. (2) the discrete survival time formulation is general and any algorithm that can optimize a binomial log-likelihood can be used to obtain parameter estimates. Thus, within this approach we can apply any method for computing the probability of a binary event and can choose from various binary classification methods, from traditional regression methods to more complex machine learning approaches. Estimation can be conducted by applying these methods to the described person-period data set. The resulting estimates can then be used in Eq. (1) to compute the predicted survival probability for a The advantage of a discrete-time survival approach is that it does not require a proportional hazards assump- tion for the survival time distribution. As well, it provides a more intuitive interpretation since the hazard function represents the probability of experiencing the event in an interval given the person is alive at the start of the interval. Discrete-time models are also able to handle tied failure times without adjustments [26], as is required in Cox PH modeling due to its assumption of a continuous hazard in which ties are not possible [3]. Cox (1972) proposed that since in discrete time the haz- ards, λij, are probabilities, they can be parameterized to have a logistic dependence with the predictors and time intervals [4, 27]. That is, we assume the predictors are linearly associated with the logistic transformation of the hazard (logit-hazard) instead of with the hazard probabili- ties themselves. Specifically, the conditional odds of expe- riencing failure in each time interval (tj−1, tj] (given that it has not yet occurred) is assumed to be linear function of the predictor and interval effects. This model is referred to as the continuation ratio model, and is specified as = αj + βXi where αj is the logit of the baseline hazard for interval (tj−1, tj], and β describes the effect of the other covariates on the baseline hazard on the logit scale, as in a logistic regression. That is, for a binary predictor Xip, a positive (negative) coefficient estimate for βp indicates an upward (downard) shift in the logit-hazard for those with Xip = 1 from the logit-hazard for those with Xip = 0. Thus, by tak- ing the exponential on both sides of Eq. (3), we see that the odds is proportional for those with Xip = 1 vs. 0. This property restricts the discrete hazards of both groups Fig. 1 Example of a person-period data set (on right) created from continuous-time survival data (on left). In the timeline plot, circles indicate censoring and diamonds indicate events. The horizon of interest is w = 5 and there are J = 5 specified intervals defined as 1:A1=(t0, t1], 2:A2=(t1, t2], 3:A3=(t2, t3], 4:A4=(t3, t4], 5:A5=(t4, t5], whose endpoints are given by t0=0, t1=1, t2=2, t3=3, t4=4, t5=5. ID 1 experiences an event in interval 3 and thus in the person-period data set they have rows corresponding to the first three intervals and for the 3rd interval, their event status is a 1. ID 2 is censored in interval 4 and in the person-period data set they have row corresponding to the first 4 intervals and have an event status of 0 for all of them. ID 3 experiences the event at a time beyond the prediction horizon of interest, thus we administratively censor them at the prediction horizon and they have a row in the person-period for all intervals and have an event status of 0 for all of them

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 8 of 18 from crossing. This rules out the scenario in which predic- tors have protective short term effects on survival but are inferior at later time points. Notice also that this effect is not a function of time, and thus is assumed to be constant In the likelihood given in Eq. (2), the continuation ratio model assumes that the classification model for λij(Xi) is a logistic regression. Estimation is conducted by obtaining maximum likelihood estimates of αj and β using standard logistic regression software applied to the person-period data set. With estimates for αj and β, we can then com- pute λkj(Xk) for a new subject k from the same population for all time intervals j, and then compute the survival prediction given in Eq. (1). With the logistic model, when the magnitude of the hazards is small we find that the odds of failure approx- imate the probability of failure (i.e., λij/(1 −λij) ≈λij) and that hazards from the proportional odds model and proportional hazards model approximate each other. The continuation ratio model is shown to converge to the Cox model as the length of the discrete-time intervals goes to zero (i.e., the number of time intervals in a fixed period In the parameterization g(λij|Xi) = αj+βXi, we can also consider models with alternative link functions for g that are commonly used for binary outcomes. The Gompertz or grouped proportional hazards model that uses a com- plementary log-log link, log(−log(λij|Xi)), is a discrete- time equivalent to a Cox PH model. Other parameteriza- tions include the probit model (probit link), 	−1(λij|Xi), the Gumbel model (log-log link), −log(−log(λij|Xi)), or the Exponential model (log link), log(λij|Xi). For predic- tion purposes, the choice of link can be based on the pre- dictive performance of the different models. It has been shown that the differences between the different models are small if the length of the discrete-time intervals are With both the continuous-time proportional hazards models and the parametric discrete-time models we make a proportionality assumption, which can be restrictive. Additionally, these models assume that the effect of the predictors on the transformed hazard is linear. An exten- sion to allow for nonlinear effects is to use a semipara- metric regression where the baseline hazard and covariate effects are specified as smooth, possibly non-linear func- tions of time, i.e., λij = f0(j) + P p=1 fp(Xip), and f0 and fp can be chosen to be spline functions [46]. This can also be further extended to allow for non-proportional haz- ards and time-varying covariate effects by specifying fp as a function of time, such as fp(Xip, t) = fp(Xip) · t. While these extensions can increase the flexibility of paramet- ric modeling approaches, they may still not adequately capture the relationships that exist in the data. These rela- tionships must be known and specified in the model- building process. Thus, there may be interest in explor- ing flexible, non-parametric approaches for describing the dependence between the hazard and predictors in the Machine learning classification models An alternative approach for specifying this dependence is to use a non-parametric machine learning approach, such as random forests and neural network, with the form λij(Xi) = f (Xi, Aj) where f is a particular machine learning algorithm or model, Xi is the subject-specific covariates, and Aj is the categorical variable indicating the time interval. We fit a machine learning algorithm, f, to the person- period data set for the binary outcome of failure with the vector of predictors being the patient-specific covariates and the categorical variable identifying the discrete-time interval. For a new patient k with covariates Xk, we can then obtain model-free estimates of the conditional prob- abilities ˆλkj(Xk) for each interval j 0, . . . , J. These estimates can then be plugged into Eq. (1), to get the survival prediction for patient k up to time t, i.e., πk(t). The development of prediction models using a discrete- time framework has been demonstrated with semi- parametric methods [46], tree-based methods [29, 30], and neural networks [31, 33, 47]. With a discrete-time survival approach we are able to take advantage of the available software and computational efficiency for binary classification algorithms to predict the survival probabil- ities of interest. Within this class of more flexible predic- tion models, we can also consider penalized regression approaches such as lasso, ridge, and elastic net [48]. These approaches and their corresponding software implemen- tations can accommodate additional binary classification methods without requiring method-specific estimation or optimization for obtaining the predicted survival proba- With machine learning algorithms, there is usually need to specify a hyperparameter. These are parameters that cannot be estimated but instead are specified to control the model training process. For example, in the random forest there are hyperparameters corresponding to the number of decision trees in the forest and the num- ber of predictors considered at each split. Higher values for each of these can increase the computational time required for training the random forest. In the LASSO, the hyperparameter is a regularization parameter that is added to the ordinary least squares regression, such that higher values penalize the algorithm for including too many non-zero coefficients, thus performing variable

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 9 of 18 The optimal hyperparameter values are not theoreti- cally determined or based on prior knowledge, but instead can be tuned using empirical results. That is, for a grid of possible hyperparameter values or combinations of values when there are multiple hyperparameters, we can assess the performance of an algorithm under each set of val- ues and select the values that lead to the best predictive performance. To avoid overfitting, we can perform hyper- parameter tuning using cross-validation. We then select the hyperparameter values as those that optimize the performance of the cross-validated performance metric. These hyperparameter values are then used to train the algorithm on the training data set to build the prediction With the use of binary classification models in the discrete-time survival setting, in addition to the hyper- parameters required by the binary classification method employed, we also can tune the number of time inter- vals used for discretizing. The performance accuracy of discrete-time models has been shown to vary based on the number of intervals used [49]. Thus, instead of specifying the number of intervals, we can also consider this to be a hyperparameter for which an appropriate grid of possible values is explored to balance computational complexity and maximizing predictive performance. The choice for the performance metric used for tuning should be the same as the metric used for overall perfor- mance assessment. Otherwise, tuned models might not have superior performance when compared to other mod- els built using the same algorithm, and thus may not give a fair comparison when identifying the best method across multiple classes of prediction models and algorithms. We describe performance metrics for survival models in a In an alternative approach to estimation, some recom- mend a different way of specifying the contribution of the censored subjects. If the censored individual’s survival time is in the second half of interval Aj−1 or the first half of interval Aj, i.e., 1 2(tj−2 + tj−1) ≤Ti < 1 2(tj−1 + tj), we can consider their likelihood contribution as the product of the conditional survival probabilities from j = 1, . . . , j −1 [16, 32]. Thus, a subject only gets counted for surviving an interval if they survive at least half that interval. This is in contrast with our current specification of including any intervals during which the censored subject has informa- tion observed. In the event that there is a lot of censoring present in the data or that there are fewer intervals speci- fied with longer lengths, our current specification can bias the estimated hazard downward and the predicted sur- vival towards one, making this alternative method a useful strategy to pursue. Another specification would be to con- sider observations that are censored in interval Aj as being censored at the end of interval Aj−1. This mimics typical discrete-time data collection, where if an individual is lost to follow-up between measurement times tj−1 and tj, we would have last observed them at tj−1. We demonstrate how the person-period data set would be created under each of these specifications in Fig. 2. There are also alternative approaches for prediction that exist within the discrete-time framework. In Eq. (1), we demonstrate the survival function can be written as a sequence of predictions from binary classification mod- els. So far, the binary classification approach we have discussed models the conditional probabilities (or haz- ards) directly and uses the resulting estimates to compute the survival probability. Due to the dependence of the outcomes of these classification models (i.e., a death in Fig. 2 Demonstration of different specifications of censoring to create a person-period data set (on right) from continuous-time survival data of two censored individuals (on left). The horizon of interest is w = 5 and there are J = 5 intervals defined as Aj = (tj−1, tj] for j ∈{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Three different specifications are given for whether an individual contributes to a particular interval (Event1: intervals during which the individual is observed, Event2: intervals for which they survive at least half of the interval, Event3: intervals for which they survive the entire interval). ID 4 is censored in the first half of interval 3, so in the person-period data set they do not contribute to interval 3 in the Event2 and Event3 specification. ID 5 is censored in second half of interval 4, so in the person-period data set for interval 4 they contribute under Event2 specification but not under Event3 specification since they do not survive to the end of the interval

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 10 of 18 a particular interval implies a death in all subsequent intervals), we can instead think of modeling the survival distribution directly as a series of dependent classifica- tion models. This can be considered a multi-task learn- ing problem, where the related classification models are solved in parallel [50]. Yu et al. (2011) [51] proposed using multi-task logis- tic regression that specifies a logistic regression model for the conditional survival probability of each discrete-time interval and directly models the survival function by com- bining these local classification models. This approach estimates model parameters across these logistic regres- sion models jointly using an optimization algorithm that uses two regularizers, a Euclidean norm regularization of the parameters to prevent overfitting, and a second reg- ularizer that ensures the parameters vary smoothly over consecutive time intervals. Li et al. (2016) [52] also pro- poses a multi-task learning approach with logistic regres- sion that uses an ℓ2,1-norm penalty to achieve a shared representation across the dependent classification prob- lems that encourages sparsity and limits overfitting, and thus reduce the prediction error of each task. These meth- ods have been shown to have superior performance com- pared to the Cox PH model [49, 51]. Other approaches have used a multi-task framework for discrete-time sur- vival prediction by applying a deep learning approach to the series of binary classification tasks [47], and have been extended to accommodate competing risks [53]. Bender et al. (2020) [54] described using a Poisson regression framework applied to continuous survival data that specifies the hazard as a piecewise exponential PH model and uses a Poisson log-likelihood for estimation. One can then apply the range of machine learning algo- rithms that can optimize a Poisson (instead of a binomial) log-likelihood to perform estimation, which similarly to the described classification approach allows for a variety of existing algorithms to be applied to predicting survival. When continuous time is observed and we are willing to consider it in a discrete-time framework, this approach may be preferable due to its robustness to the choice of intervals. As well, we can use information about a subject’s partial observation in an interval instead of assuming that a censored subject survives the entirety of the last interval in which they were observed. Building discrete-time survival prediction models A visualization of the model building and testing pro- cedure for developing a survival prediction model is demonstrated in Fig. 3, and is comprised of the following The data set should consist of individual-level records, such that there is a single row for each individual with a separate column for each baseline predictor. It must also contain a column of the subject’s follow-up time and a column indicating their event status at that time. If there are any subjects that are missing these two vari- ables, they must be excluded from the data set. If there are any subjects that are missing other covariates, they can be removed from the data set to perform a complete case analysis. Alternatively imputation methods, such as using random forests [55, 56], can be applied to a covariate data set that excludes the follow-up time and event indicator columns to fill in missing predictor values. To train our model we define an appropriate training data set based on our validation procedure. If we are using a 60/20/20 training/validation/test split we randomly select Fig. 3 Visualization of the model building and testing process

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 11 of 18 60% of our full data set as the training data, 20% as a val- idation data set used to evaluate the model and select the hyperparameters, and the remaining 20% as a hold-out data set used for final model evaluation. If we are using a cross-validation or bootstrapping approach, then we nest the rest of the following components within a loop which randomly splits the data into folds (cross-validation) or resamples with replacement (bootstrapping), identifying the appropriate training and test data set for each iteration For the discrete-time survival models, we create the person-period data set for training the models using the training data. We discretize the continuous survival times into intervals. The intervals correspond to time points during follow-up at which the estimated hazard (condi- tional risk probability) is allowed to change. These inter- vals could be chosen based on the clinical context (i.e., times at which the conditional risk is expected to change). For example, in a clinical setting where patients are at high risk during a particular follow-up period and receive treatment and additional monitoring, one could increase the number of intervals during this period to reflect the frequently changing conditional risk. The horizon can be selected as the maximum of the prediction times of inter- est, or a clinically relevant follow-up time. Administrative censoring is then applied at this time horizon, such that individuals who experience an event or are censored after the horizon have a survival time that corresponds to the time horizon and are assumed to be event-free at that time. This limits the size of the resulting person-period data set and decreases the computational complexity. The resulting time range from baseline to the horizon is then divided into the specified number of intervals. The time intervals can be uniformly spaced on the range of event times within the horizon, but they do not have be equal in length and can be identified based on the quantiles of the event times. In this manuscript, we consider a general approach that requires specifying the number of inter- vals and then identifying the specific intervals based on the quantiles of the event times within a particular time Some machine learning methods require the specifica- tion of hyperparameters that must be tuned to optimize performance. In Additional File Table A1, we describe the hyperparameters for the methods considered in this manuscript. For the discrete-time prediction models, we additionally treat the number of intervals as a hyperpa- rameter [49]. Tuning can be performed by identifying a reasonable range for the hyperparameter values, selecting a method by which to sample the values, and selecting a metric to assess performance. The model is fit for all of the sampled hyperparameter values and evaluated on the validation data. The tuned hyperparameter values are selected as those that optimize the performance met- ric. Methods of sampling the values include grid search, random search, and Bayesian optimization that uses the results from the previous iteration to improve the sam- pling of hyperparameter values for the current iteration [57–59]. The performance metric can be evaluated using an independent validation data set, cross-validation or We apply the trained models to the test data set to obtain the predicted survival probabilities for the specified pre- diction horizons of interest. For the discrete-time models, we must create a person-period data set for the test data. We compute performance metrics to compare these pre- dictions to the observed outcomes in the data set. This stage provides an assessment of the generalizability of the trained model to a new data set, and can identify issues such as overfitting. For a cross-validation or bootstrap- ping approach, the performance metrics from the model testing are averaged across multiple iterations. The results from this stage are compared for the different models to identify the optimal model or model architecture from which to obtain predictions from a new individual from To compare models and choose the best approach for developing a prediction model we compute several met- rics of predictive performance. Prognostic models are often assessed on two domains: (i) discrimination, which is their ability to distinguish between those with high and low risk of experiencing the event, and (ii) calibra- tion, which is the agreement between the estimated and observed incidence of the event [60]. We assume that a model was fit to a training data set and that prediction accuracy is evaluated on an independent validation data set drawn from the same population as the training data The purpose of using an independent data set for evalua- tion is to avoid an overly optimistic assessment of perfor- mance that can occur if the training and validation data sets overlap. If an independent validation data set is not available, then internal validation can be performed on the available data using bootstrapping or cross-validation. In bootstrapping, we can consider the 0.632+ approach [61]. For B bootstrap samples the training data set is taken to be a random sample with replacement from the available data. Performance is then evaluated on a validation data set comprised of those that were not selected in the train- ing data set. Performance metrics computed for each of

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 12 of 18 the bootstrap samples are then averaged to obtain a boot- strap estimate of the metric. In K-fold cross-validation [37], we split the available data into K equal size data sets and then use each data set as the validation data set on which we assess performance of a model built on the com- bined remaining K −1 data sets. The cross-validation esti- mate of performance accuracy is then the average across the performance in the K validation data sets. This proce- dure can be repeated to reduce dependence on a particular split of the data, and an averaged estimate across the repeats can be used to obtain a repeated cross-validation estimate of predictive accuracy. When assessing the prognostic accuracy of a prediction model using baseline covariates, we compute the predic- tion at baseline (i.e., time 0) for an event that occurs in the future. Thus, subjects start event free at time 0 and their outcome status can change over time. As a result, the metrics considered for assessing predictive accuracy for time-to-event outcomes are time-dependent and can be computed for different prediction time horizons, w. In the absence of censoring, we can use empirical estimates to quantify these metrics. However, it is possible that a subject is lost to follow-up before time w, in which case we cannot know for sure whether they experienced the event before w. Thus, estimation of these time-dependent metrics must account for censoring. Here, we consider two common approaches to measure the predictive accu- racy of survival prediction models, area under the ROC curve (AUC) and Brier score. We define time-dependent measures of these metrics and describe their estimation. Area under the ROC curve A popular measure of the predictive accuracy of a predic- tive model is the area under the ROC curve. AUC, also referred to as the c-statistic or concordance index, is a summary measure of the sensitivity and specificity over a range of thresholds. This metric assesses the discrim- inative ability of the model, i.e., to distinguish between individuals with high and low risk of experiencing the outcome in the future. This can be interpreted as the prob- ability that a randomly selected subject with the event (case) has a higher predicted probability than a randomly selected subject without the event (control). It is scale-free measure, with 0.5 indicating discriminative ability similar to chance and 1 indicating perfect discrimination. The definition of AUC has been extended to a time- dependent setting using time-varying definitions of the true positive rate and false positive rate to accommo- date the change in outcome status for different prediction windows. There are multiple definitions of the time- dependent AUC that can be considered for assessing dis- crimination [62]. We use a cumulative sensitivity/dynamic specificity (C/D) definition, which distinguishes between subjects who fail prior to a particular prediction window t (i.e., cases are defined by Ti ≤t) and those that are still event-free at that time (i.e., controls are defined by Ti > t) [62, 63]. For two independent subjects i and j, the time-dependent AUC is given by AUC(t) = Pr(pi(t) > pj(t)|Ti ≤t, Tj > t) where pi(t) = 1 −πi(t) is the subject-specific prob- ability of experiencing the event by time t. This is the recommended measure of discrimination when there is a specific period of time for experiencing the event of inter- est (e.g., within the first t = 5 years of baseline) [64]. Based on its clinical relevance, the reporting of AUC using this definition is encouraged in clinical applications [65, 66]. We can also assess performance using the expected Brier score, also known as prediction error [67–69]. This metric provides an overall performance measure by simultane- ously assessing the calibration and discrimination of the prediction model. Lower values of the BS indicate better predictive performance. The Brier score can be seen as a mean square error of prediction and is given by BS(t) = E[ (D(t) −p(t))2 ] where D(t) = I(T ≤t) is the event status and p(t) is the estimated subject-specific probability of experiencing the event by time t. The Brier score has been shown to take its minimum value when the true event probabilities are used as predictions, but its maximum value is dependent on the cumulative incidence of the event of interest by time t. Instead, we can use a standardized version that scales the Brier score by that from a null model, BS0(t), that assumes that all subjects have the same predicted probability of the event regardless of their subject-specific predictors (e.g., the Kaplan-Meier estimate). This results in an R-squared type measure that represents the explained residual vari- ation and is defined by R2 = 1 −BS(t)/BS0(t), where higher values indicate better predictive performance. If we are interested in assessing the predictive performance of a model at multiple time points (e.g., for all times 0 ≤ t ≤t∗), we can integrate the Brier score with respect to a weight function, such as W(t) = t/t∗, and present an inte- grated Brier score, IBS = 0 BS(s)dW(s) [68]. In which case, the IBS can be used in the definition of R2 instead. Estimation of these time-dependent performance metrics must account for the unobserved true outcome status for some individuals during the study period due to cen- soring. To account for the loss of information due to censoring, we reweight the individual contributions using the Kaplan-Meier estimator of the survival function of the

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 13 of 18 censoring time, G(u) = Pr(C > u). Those that experi- ence the event by time t get weight 1/ ˆG( ˜Ti), those that are censored by time t get weight 0, and those that have a follow-up time beyond t get weight 1/ ˆG(t). To estimate Eqs. (4) and (5), we then use inverse probability of censoring weighting estimates of the time- dependent AUC and BS [63, 68] that are given by j=1 I(pi(t) > pj(t)) ˜Di(t) where ˜Di(t) = I(t ≤˜Ti; δi = 1), ˆS ˜T(t) = (1/n) n I( ˜Ti > t), and weights to account for censoring are given ˆWi(t) = I( ˜Ti > t) + I(t < ˜Ti)δi The advantage of these estimators is that they are model- free and make no assumption about the correctness of the specification of the models used for computing the pre- dicted probabilities. Computation of these metrics can be conducted in R using the Score function in the ‘riskRe- We present a comparison of the continuous-time mod- els, Cox PH and RSF, and discrete-time survival prediction models built using the following classification algorithms: logistic regression, conditional inference random forest, gradient boosting machine, elastic net, support vector machine, and neural network. We create the discrete-time intervals based on the quan- tiles of the event times in the data set that are within the maximum prediction horizon of interest. We additionally standardize the predictors by centering and scaling them. We perform hyperparameter tuning using a Bayesian opti- mization search scheme within a provided grid of accept- able values [59]. The hyperparameters were tuned over the validation data set to minimize the time-dependent Brier score, or the integrated Brier score when multiple time points were specified. Depending on the method for vali- dation, predictive performance is demonstrated in the test data set, or averaged across cross-validation folds. To compare the performance of these methods in vari- ous settings, we assess the predictive performance of the discrete-time and continuous-time methods in multiple publicly-available data sets. The data set characteristics are described in Table 2, and vary in terms of sample size, number of predictors, and censoring. We present Table 2 Description of data sets used to assess external validity metabric (Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium) is obtained from the Python DeepSurv package [42]. The remaining data sets are from the R survival package [22]: flchain (Assay Of Serum Free Light Chain), nwtco (National Wilm’s Tumor Study), colon (Chemotherapy for Stage B/C colon cancer), pbc (Mayo Clinic Primary Biliary Cholangitis Data) 5-fold cross-validation performance metrics for predict- ing survival probability at the median survival time (Table 3, Additional File Table A2). In terms of R2 based on the Brier score (Table 3), overall we find that both discrete- and continuous-time methods performed well across the different data sets, with the exception of the discrete-time support vector machine approach that performed much worse than the other methods in all but one data set. A discrete-time method had the best predictive performance in all but one of the data sets. The best discrete-time methods were those that use a neural network or conditional forest classification approach. The discrete-time approach using logistic regression performed similarly to the Cox pro- portional hazards model for all data sets. We find similar results for AUC (Additional File Table A2). The optimal number of intervals for a particular discrete-time model varied across data sets as well as for the different discrete- time models within a particular data set (Additional File Table 3 Cross-validated R-squared Brier score for continuous and discrete-time survival prediction models in multiple data sets Higher values indicated better predictive performance. Bold values indicate method with best predictive performance (highest R-squared) in a particular data set. CForest: conditional inference random forest; GBM: gradient boosting machines; PH: proportional hazards; RSF: random survival forest

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 14 of 18 We additionally demonstrate the modeling process and resulting predictions in the R programming environ- ment using the data sets pbc and colon from the ‘sur- vival’ package, with code available at: https://github.com/ ksuresh17/autoSurv. The binary classification models are fit using the ‘caret’ package, allowing for easy extension to other classification methods as they become available. We use these two examples to demonstrate alternate parame- terizations of censoring during model training, and differ- ent methods of evaluation (cross-validation, test/training split) for single or multiple prediction times of interest. The pbc data set consists of 276 patients with primary biliary cirrhosis who have complete information on 17 clinical and demographic predictors. The median follow- up time in this data set is 6.7 years and the censoring rate is 60%. Cross-validation is performed within the training data set to tune the hyperparameters, and predictive per- formance metrics are reported as the average across the cross-validation folds. The models were tuned for pre- dicting survival probability at seven years using the Brier score. For the discrete-time models, the censored obser- vations are treated as surviving an interval if they survive at least half of the interval. The cross-validated performance metrics are presented in Table 4. We report the tuned number of intervals for the discrete survival models and find that these vary across the different models. In Additional File Fig. A1, we present the interval endpoints in the full data based on the optimal number of intervals for each discrete-time method. The cross-validated AUCs are similar, ranging from 0.83-0.88, indicating good discrimination for all models. In com- paring the continuous-time models to the discrete-time Table 4 Cross-validated time-dependent R-squared measure of Brier score and AUC for the prediction models applied to the pbc test data to predict survival at w = 7 years Higher values of AUC and R2 scores indicate better performance. Results are sorted by decreasing R2 (best to worst). Type indicates whether the method is applied to continuous- or discrete-time data. AUC: area under the ROC curve; CForest: conditional inference random forest; GBM: gradient boosting machines; PH: proportional hazards; RSF: random survival forest models, we find that several discrete-time survival models outperform the continuous-time Cox PH model. The neu- ral network applied in the discrete-time framework has the best overall performance with the highest R2, and the continuous-time random survival forest has the highest We examine the predicted survival probabilities for an individual in Fig. 4 for the continuous-time models, Cox PH and RSF, and for the discrete-time models that use a logistic regression and neural network. We can see that the survival estimates from the discrete-time models are a step function with the number of steps being equiva- lent to the number of tuned intervals. The steps in the Cox PH model and RSF correspond to event times in the data set. These individual-specific predictions can be used in clinical practice to identify whether the patient is at increased risk of death during follow-up and to aid in making treatment or monitoring decisions at baseline. The colon data set has complete information for 11 baseline predictors for 888 patients with colon cancer that participated in a trial studying adjuvent chemothera- pies. The median follow-up time in this data set was 6.4 years and the censoring rate 52%. We use this data set to demonstrate the comparison of model performance for predicting survival across multiple prediction time points (i.e., 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 years). We use a 60/20/20 train- ing/validation/test split sample. The models were tuned using the integrated Brier score over the prediction times of interest. The censored observations in the discrete-time models were considered to survive an interval if they were at risk at the start of the interval. We present the time-dependent AUC and Brier score in Fig. 5. Applied to this data set, we find that several of the discrete time-to-event models perform better than the continuous-time models, Cox PH and RSF. The ran- dom forest in the discrete-time framework has better performance than the random survival forest. The Cox PH model has similar predictive performance to the logistic regression across the time points. The SVM discrete-time approach has poor performance based on both AUC and Brier score at all times. Survival prediction models predict the risk of a future event and can be used in biomedical research to make treatment and monitoring decisions. These prediction models built using time-to-event data must account for censoring to avoid biased and inefficient predictions. Machine learning methods for classification have been adapted to accommodate censoring, but require the spec- ification and optimization of a method-specific survival function. Thus, implementation of these methods is often

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 15 of 18 Fig. 4 Predicted survival probabilities for a randomly selected individual in the pbc data set with continuous-time models, Cox PH and RSF, and discrete-time models using logistic regression and a neural network. NNet: neural network; PH: proportional hazards; RSF: random survival forest found in different software packages. As well, some ML survival methods return the predicted survival time which can be inaccurate [68], or the risk score which requires estimation of the baseline hazard to be used for obtain- ing predicted survival probabilities. Here, we propose the use of discrete-time survival models to provide an alter- nate model architecture for predicting survival probabili- ties compared to the traditional continuous-time survival An advantage of discrete-time prediction models over the commonly used Cox PH model is that they are able to handle ties in event times naturally. As well, any binary classification method can be implemented within the framework without requiring a model-derived specifica- tion of the survival function. This provides additional flexibility in being able to specify a method that does not require a proportional hazards assumption. Specifically, we consider nonparametric machine learning classifica- tion methods to take advantage of their ability to cap- ture complex relationships between the predictors and the outcome, their lack of required prior specification of predictor relationships and behaviour, and their current availability in open-source software. In an application to multiple publicly available data sets, we demonstrate that the discrete time-to-event methods have similar or sometimes superior performance to the Cox PH and random survival forest applied to continuous- time data. By treating as a tuning parameter the num- ber of intervals used to create the person-period data set on which we train the discrete-time models, we are able to optimize performance for each applied classifi- cation approach. We can then at the very least achieve similar predictive performance between a logistic regres- sion model and a Cox PH, which become approximately Fig. 5 Test set time-dependent R-squared measure of Brier score (left) and AUC (right) for prediction models applied to the colon data set. Higher values indicate better predictive performance. The R-squared IBS over the 5 time points for the different models are in decreasing order: GBM (0.132), CForest (0.119), RSF (0.105), GBM (0.105), Elastic net (0.101), Cox (0.098), Logistic regression (0.096), Neural network (0.069), SVM (0.010). AUC: area under the ROC curve; CForest: Conditional inference random forest; GBM: gradient boosting machines; NNet: neural network; PH: proportional hazards; RSF: random survival forest

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 16 of 18 equivalent as the width of the discrete-time intervals decreases (i.e., the number of intervals increases). The optimal number of intervals varied both within a data set across the different discrete-time methods and for a par- ticular method across the different data sets. The support vector machine method applied within the discrete-time framework had consistently poor performance in many data sets with the exception of the smallest data set. Support vector machines have been shown to have poor performance in settings with imbalanced data [70], and by using a person-period data set we are potentially creat- ing greater imbalance as the number of intervals increases and the number of events per interval decreases. The rela- tive performance of the ML classification methods varied based on the data application. Thus, care should be taken to appropriately train and assess the considered classifica- tion methods for each specific application (e.g., specifying reasonable ranges for the hyperparameter search space). The disadvantage of the discrete-time approach is that compared to the Cox PH model we are unable to obtain an interpretation of the relationship between the pre- dictors and the survival probabilities. This is a common phenomenon with machine learning methods applied to continuous survival data as well. Thus, if there is interest in both inference and prediction, model-agnostic explainer methods can be considered [71, 72]. Addition- ally, the discrete-time survival method increases compu- tational burden. As the number of discrete-time intervals increases so does the size of the person-period data set that includes a row for each person for each interval at which they are still at risk within the prediction hori- zon of interest. Thus, in comparing the conditional forest implemented in the discrete-time framework to the ran- dom survival forest, the conditional forest is applied to the larger person-period data set and takes more time to com- pute the survival probabilities. In our applications to data, we limited the maximum number of intervals considered in the tuning process to 25 and were able to achieve com- parable predictive performance to the continuous-time methods. By tuning the number of intervals and select- ing the endpoints based on quantiles of event times, the resulting optimal intervals are driven by the particular data set and prediction method and may have limited While we have demonstrated that the discrete-time models had similar or superior predictive performance in our applications to Cox models and random survival forests, these results may not be generalizable to other data sets, settings, or continuous-time prediction meth- ods. Here, we use these approaches to obtain predicted survival probabilities for time points during an individ- ual’s follow-up. However, other prediction approaches may be more appropriate if the goal for clinical imple- mentation is to predict a risk score (e.g., gradient boosted Cox) or survival time (e.g., parametric survival models), or examine variable importance (e.g., random survival forest). Thus, when developing a prediction model for time-to-event outcomes, in addition to assessing predic- tive performance, models should be evaluated based on their appropriateness to obtain the desired interpretation, visualization, and clinical implementation. There are alternative approaches for obtaining sur- vival predictions applied to a discrete-time framework. The multi-task learning approach creates a sequence of classification models, such as logistic regression or neu- ral networks [51, 52], however requires a classification method-specific definition of the survival function for optimization. Thus, it lacks the scalability to accom- modate multiple and newly developed ML classification methods that is possible with the approach considered in this manuscript. There are also various extensions of discrete-time survival models to accommodate other characteristics of time-to-event data, such as competing risks or time-dependent covariates [26, 73]. Extensions to using ensemble approaches for prediction within the discrete-time framework have also been explored [30, 74]. Thus, the flexibility and versatility of the discrete-time survival models make it a useful option to consider when developing a prediction model for survival outcomes. In this manuscript, we describe the advantages of using machine learning within a discrete-time framework for predicting survival probabilities. We demonstrate the use of these methods using publicly available data sets and compare their predictive performance to the continuous- time Cox PH model and random survival forest. The ability of the discrete-time methods to achieve similar or sometimes superior predictive performance when com- puting predictions at a single time or multiple time points of interest indicate that they should be considered when developing survival prediction models. By presenting soft- ware and a model development framework for discrete- time prediction models, we aim to encourage their inclu- sion in identifying a model architecture for optimally predicting survival in various time-to-event applications. AFT: accelerated failure time; AUC: area under the ROC curve; BS: Brier score; CForest: conditional inference forest; GBM: gradient boosting machine; IBS: integrated Brier score; PH: proportional hazards; ML: machine learning; NNet: neural network; ROC: receiver operating characteristic; RSF: random survival forest; SVM: support vector machine The online version contains supplementary material available at Additional file 1: Supplementary Material.

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 17 of 18 We acknowledge the researchers who developed the code, software, and methodology that are built upon to present the results in this manuscript. KS, CS, and DG contributed to the conception and design of the work. KS and CS wrote the code and interpreted the results. KS drafted the manuscript, and all authors read, edited, and approved the final manuscript. Supported by ACS IRG #16-184-56 from the American Cancer Society to the University of Colorado Cancer Center. DG acknowledges funding from National Institutes of Health R01 CA129102. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the Availability of data and materials In this manuscript we use publicly available data in the R programming environment [35]. The described software for implementation is available at https://github.com/ksuresh17/autoSurv. The referenced data sets are publicly available in the following software packages: R survival (flchain, nwtco, colon, pbc) [22], Python DeepSurv (metabric) accessible at https://github.com/ Ethics approval and consent to participate This study uses publicly available data thus ethics approval and informed consent was not required. No administrative permissions and/or licenses were required to access the data. All methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 1Department of Biostatistics and Informatics, Colorado School of Public Health, Aurora, USA. 2Child Health Biostatistics Core Department of Pediatrics, Section of Endocrinology, School of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, USA. Received: 1 February 2022 Accepted: 8 July 2022 Kattan MW. Comparison of cox regression with other methods for determining prediction models and nomograms. J Urol. 2003;170(6S): Wang P, Li Y, Reddy CK. Machine learning for survival analysis: A survey. ACM Comput Surv (CSUR). 2019;51(6):1–36. Kleinbaum DG, Klein M. Survival Analysis, vol. 3. New York: Springer; 2010. Cox DR. Regression models and life-tables. J R Stat Soc Ser B Methodol. Therneau TM, Grambsch PM. Modeling Survival Data: Extending the Cox Model. New York: Springer; 2000. Binder H, Schumacher M. Allowing for mandatory covariates in boosting estimation of sparse high-dimensional survival models. BMC Zhang HH, Lu W. Adaptive lasso for cox’s proportional hazards model. Ishwaran H, Kogalur UB, Blackstone EH, Lauer MS. Random survival forests. Ann Appl Stat. 2008;2(3):841–60. Bou-Hamad I, Larocque D, Ben-Ameur H. A review of survival trees. Stat 10. Segal MR. Regression trees for censored data. Biometrics. 1988;44(1): 11. Hothorn T, Bühlmann P, Dudoit S, Molinaro A, Van Der Laan MJ. Survival 12. Khan FM, Zubek VB. Support vector regression for censored data (svrc): a novel tool for survival analysis. In: 2008 Eighth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining. Pisa: IEEE; 2008. p. 863–68. 13. Van Belle V, Pelckmans K, Van Huffel S, Suykens JA. Support vector methods for survival analysis: a comparison between ranking and regression approaches. Artif Intell Med. 2011;53(2):107–18. 14. Faraggi D, Simon R. A neural network model for survival data. Stat Med. 15. Ripley RM, Harris AL, Tarassenko L. Non-linear survival analysis using neural networks. Stat Med. 2004;23(5):825–42. 16. Brown SF, Branford AJ, Moran W. On the use of artificial neural networks for the analysis of survival data. IEEE Trans Neural Netw. 1997;8(5):1071–77. 17. Ripley BD, Ripley RM. Neural networks as statistical methods in survival analysis. Clin Appl Artif Neural Netw. 2001;237:255. 18. Du M, Haag DG, Lynch JW, Mittinty MN. Comparison of the tree-based machine learning algorithms to cox regression in predicting the survival of oral and pharyngeal cancers: Analyses based on seer database. 19. Qiu X, Gao J, Yang J, Hu J, Hu W, Kong L, Lu JJ. A comparison study of machine learning (random survival forest) and classic statistic (cox proportional hazards) for predicting progression in high-grade glioma after proton and carbon ion radiotherapy. Front Oncol. 2020;10:2311. 20. Kuhn M. Caret: Classification and Regression Training. 2021. R package version 6.0-88. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=caret. Accessed 1 21. LeDell E, Gill N, Aiello S, Fu A, Candel A, Click C, Kraljevic T, Nykodym T, Aboyoun P, Kurka M, Malohlava M. H2o: R Interface for the ’H2O’ Scalable Machine Learning Platform. 2020. R package version 3.32.0.1. https:// CRAN.R-project.org/package=h2o. Accessed 1 Dec 2021. 22. Therneau TM. A Package for Survival Analysis in R. 2020. R package version 3.2-7. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=survival. Accessed 1 Dec 2021. 23. Yang Y, Zou H. Fastcox: Lasso and Elastic-Net Penalized Cox’s Regression in High Dimensions Models Using the Cocktail Algorithm. 2017. R package version 1.1.3. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=fastcox. Accessed 1 Dec 2021. 24. Ishwaran H, Kogalur UB. Fast Unified Random Forests for Survival, Regression, and Classification (RF-SRC). 2021. R package version 2.10.1. https://cran.r-project.org/package=randomForestSRC. Accessed 1 Dec 25. Fotso S, et al. PySurvival: Open source package for Survival Analysis modeling. 2019. https://www.pysurvival.io/. Accessed 1 Dec 2021. 26. Tutz G, Schmid M, et al. Modeling Discrete Time-to-event Data. New York: 27. Singer JD, Willett JB. It’s about time: Using discrete-time survival analysis to study duration and the timing of events. J Educ Stat. 1993;18(2):155–95. 28. D’Agostino RB, Lee M-L, Belanger AJ, Cupples LA, Anderson K, Kannel WB. Relation of pooled logistic regression to time dependent cox regression analysis: the framingham heart study. Stat Med. 1990;9(12): 29. Bou-Hamad I, Larocque D, Ben-Ameur H. Discrete-time survival trees and forests with time-varying covariates: application to bankruptcy data. Stat 30. Schmid M, Küchenhoff H, Hoerauf A, Tutz G. A survival tree method for the analysis of discrete event times in clinical and epidemiological studies. Stat Med. 2016;35(5):734–51. 31. Biganzoli E, Boracchi P, Mariani L, Marubini E. Feed forward neural networks for the analysis of censored survival data: a partial logistic regression approach. Stat Med. 1998;17(10):1169–86. 32. Gensheimer MF, Narasimhan B. A scalable discrete-time survival model for neural networks. PeerJ. 2019;7:6257. 33. Liestbl K, Andersen PK, Andersen U. Survival analysis and neural nets. Stat 34. Kvamme H, Borgan Ø.. Continuous and discrete-time survival prediction with neural networks. Lifetime Data Anal. 2021;27(4):710–36. 35. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing; 2021. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. https://www.R-project.org/. Accessed 1 Dec 2021. 36. Sidey-Gibbons JA, Sidey-Gibbons CJ. Machine learning in medicine: a practical introduction. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2019;19(1):1–18.

Suresh et al. BMC Medical Research Methodology (2022) 22:207 Page 18 of 18 37. Friedman J, Hastie T, Tibshirani R, et al. The Elements of Statistical Learning, vol. 1. New York: Springer; 2001. 38. Kuhn M, Johnson K, et al. Applied Predictive Modeling, vol. 26. New York: 39. Murphy KP. Machine Learning: a Probabilistic Perspective. Massachusetts: 40. Bishop CM, Nasrabadi NM. Pattern recognition and machine learning. New York: Springer; 2006. 41. Gerds TA, Kattan MW. Medical Risk Prediction Models: With Ties to Machine Learning (1st Ed.) Boca Raton: Chapman and Hall/CRC; 2021. 42. Katzman JL, Shaham U, Cloninger A, Bates J, Jiang T, Kluger Y. Deepsurv: personalized treatment recommender system using a cox proportional hazards deep neural network. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2018;18(1):1–12. 43. Ching T, Zhu X, Garmire LX. Cox-nnet: an artificial neural network method for prognosis prediction of high-throughput omics data. PLoS 44. LeBlanc M, Crowley J. Survival trees by goodness of split. J Am Stat Assoc. 45. Thompson Jr W. On the treatment of grouped observations in life studies. 46. Berger M, Schmid M. Semiparametric regression for discrete time-to-event data. Stat Model. 2018;18(3-4):322–45. 47. Giunchiglia E, Nemchenko A, van der Schaar M. Rnn-surv: A deep recurrent model for survival analysis. In: International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks. Rhodes: Springer; 2018. p. 23–32. 48. James G, Witten D, Hastie T, Tibshirani R. An Introduction to Statistical Learning, vol. 112. New York: Springer; 2013. 49. Sloma M, Syed F, Nemati M, Xu KS. Empirical comparison of continuous and discrete-time representations for survival prediction. In: Survival Prediction-Algorithms, Challenges and Applications. PMLR; 2021. p. 50. Caruana R. Multitask learning. Mach Learn. 1997;28(1):41–75. 51. Yu C-N, Greiner R, Lin H-C, Baracos V. Learning patient-specific cancer survival distributions as a sequence of dependent regressors. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst. 2011;24:1845–53. 52. Li Y, Wang J, Ye J, Reddy CK. A multi-task learning formulation for survival analysis. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. San Francisco; 53. Lee C, Zame WR, Yoon J, van der Schaar M. Deephit: A deep learning approach to survival analysis with competing risks. In: Thirty-second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence; 2018. 54. Bender A, Rügamer D, Scheipl F, Bischl B. A general machine learning framework for survival analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.15442. 2020. 55. Stekhoven DJ, Bühlmann P. MissForest - non-parametric missing value imputation for mixed-type data. Biostatistics. 2012;28(1):112–8. 56. Shah AD, Bartlett JW, Carpenter J, Nicholas O, Hemingway H. Comparison of random forest and parametric imputation models for imputing missing data using mice: a caliber study. Am J Epidemiol. 57. Bergstra J, Bengio Y. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. J Mach Learn Res. 2012;13(2):281–305. 58. Claesen M, De Moor B. Hyperparameter search in machine learning. arXiv 59. Snoek J, Larochelle H, Adams RP. Practical bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst. 2012;25:2951–9. 60. Steyerberg EW, Vickers AJ, Cook NR, Gerds T, Gonen M, Obuchowski N, Pencina MJ, Kattan MW. Assessing the performance of prediction models: a framework for some traditional and novel measures. Epidemiol 61. Efron B, Tibshirani R. Improvements on cross-validation: the 632+ bootstrap method. J Am Stat Assoc. 1997;92(438):548–60. 62. Heagerty PJ, Zheng Y. Survival model predictive accuracy and roc curves. 63. Blanche P, Latouche A, Viallon V. Time-dependent auc with right-censored data: a survey. In: Risk Assessment and Evaluation of Predictions. New York: Springer; 2013. p. 239–51. 64. Blanche P, Kattan MW, Gerds TA. The c-index is not proper for the evaluation of-year predicted risks. Biostatistics. 2019;20(2):347–57. 65. Blanche P, Dartigues J-F, Jacqmin-Gadda H. Review and comparison of roc curve estimators for a time-dependent outcome with marker-dependent censoring. Biom J. 2013;55(5):687–704. 66. Lambert J, Chevret S. Summary measure of discrimination in survival models based on cumulative/dynamic time-dependent roc curves. Stat Methods Med Res. 2016;25(5):2088–102. 67. Brier GW, et al. Verification of forecasts expressed in terms of probability. Mon Weather Rev. 1950;78(1):1–3. 68. Graf E, Schmoor C, Sauerbrei W, Schumacher M. Assessment and comparison of prognostic classification schemes for survival data. Stat 69. Gerds TA, Schumacher M. Consistent estimation of the expected brier score in general survival models with right-censored event times. Biom J. 70. He H, Ma Y. Imbalanced Learning: Foundations, Algorithms, and Applications. Hoboken: Wiley-IEEE Press; 2013. 71. Ribeiro MT, Singh S, Guestrin C. “Why should I trust you?” Explaining the predictions of any classifier. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. New York; 2016. p. 1135–44. 72. Lundberg SM, Lee S-I. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In: Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. Long Beach; 2017. p. 4768–77. 73. Schmid M, Berger M. Competing risks analysis for discrete time-to-event data. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Comput Stat. 2021;13(5):1529. 74. Tanner KT, Sharples LD, Daniel RM, Keogh RH. Dynamic survival prediction combining landmarking with a machine learning ensemble: Methodology and empirical comparison. J R Stat Soc Ser A (Stat Soc). Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

---NEW PAPER---

Scientific Reports | (2023) 13:1370 in predicting cancer survival time Steve Cygu 1*, Hsien Seow 2, Jonathan Dushoff 1,3 & Benjamin M. Bolker 1,3 The Cox proportional hazards model is commonly used in evaluating risk factors in cancer survival data. The model assumes an additive, linear relationship between the risk factors and the log hazard. However, this assumption may be too simplistic. Further, failure to take time-varying covariates into account, if present, may lower prediction accuracy. In this retrospective, population-based, prognostic study of data from patients diagnosed with cancer from 2008 to 2015 in Ontario, Canada, we applied machine learning-based time-to-event prediction methods and compared their predictive performance in two sets of analyses: (1) yearly-cohort-based time-invariant and (2) fully time- varying covariates analysis. Machine learning-based methods—gradient boosting model (gbm), random survival forest (rsf), elastic net (enet), lasso and ridge—were compared to the traditional Cox proportional hazards (coxph) model and the prior study which used the yearly-cohort-based time-invariant analysis. Using Harrell’s C index as our primary measure, we found that using both machine learning techniques and incorporating time-dependent covariates can improve predictive performance. Gradient boosting machine showed the best performance on test data in both time- invariant and time-varying covariates analysis. Early diagnosis and accurate prognosis can improve the clinical management of cancer patients. Good prog- nostic tools can help in treatment ­planning1, aid communication with patients and patients’ decision-making about surgery and treatments; and also help in timely and effective symptom ­management2. Measuring cancer patients’ well-being is significant in assessing response to treatment and capabilities for various types of ­care3. For instance, integrating palliative care interventions with oncological care for advanced cancer patients can lead to improved quality of life, reduced symptom burden, fewer hospital visits, and reduced health ­costs1,4,5. Predic- tive computational methods that predict symptoms, patients’ well-being, and survival time can help clinicians customize treatment regimes and give timely interventions. Traditional statistical methods such as Kaplan–Meier and Cox proportional hazards (coxph) models have been used to model survival ­data5–7. Both techniques estimate the probabilities of survival past a given time. As suggested by their name, coxph models make a proportional hazards assumption—i.e. they assume an additive, linear relationship between the predictors and the log ­hazard8. In clinical survival data, especially when applying machine learning (ML) techniques, a number of challenges have been ­identified9–11: first, difficulty in dealing with censored data (i.e., time-to-event is imperfectly observed); second, although ML techniques have often proven to be effective when the number of predictors is large, this is not always the case in survival ­analysis12; and third, studies on the accuracy of clinical prediction of survival time have found poor agreement with the actual survival times, with practitioners’ predictions tending to be longer than actual survival ­times5,13,14. Additional challenges in accurate prediction of survival of cancer patients emerge from the growing complex- ity of cancer, various treatment options, heterogeneous patient populations and failure to account for measure- ments which change over time (time-varying covariates)5. In survival data, time-varying covariates are common. For example, cancer patients’ chemo-therapy treatment plan or healthcare access may change over the course of the study. The standard coxph model assumes that the covariates are time-invariant and have a constant linear 1School of Computational Science and Engineering, Hamilton, McMaster University, 1280 Main St W, Hamilton, ON  L8S 4L8, Canada. 2Department of Oncology, Hamilton, McMaster University, 1280 Main St W, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada. 3Department of Biology, Hamilton, McMaster University, 1280 Main St W, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada. *email: cygubicko@gmail.com

Scientific Reports | (2023) 13:1370 | effect over the entire follow-up ­period15,16. Time-invariant coxph models have been extended to handle time- The use of ML methods in predicting the risk of death of cancer patients from clinical data is not ­new11,18–20. Depending on how these methods are applied, they can be considered standard ML methods (directly applied to predict the outcome of interest such as survival status) or ML methods for survival analysis (modified to handle time-to-event data). Standard ML methods use binary classification to predict the survival status of subjects within a particular time window. Since binary classifiers consider only whether or not the event occurred in the last observation window, they lack the interpretability and flexibility of models that consider hazards as a function of ­time15. Most ML methods for survival analysis, such as artificial neural networks (ANN)21, survival trees and random ­forest12,22, predict events of interest using covariates measured at the time of diagnosis, not accounting for the time-varying covariates. Furthermore, only a few of these models have incorporated patient-reported cancer diagnosis related outcomes such as level of pain as potential covariates to build predictive ­models5. In this paper, we build, validate and compare traditional coxph models and ML models for survival analysis, using both time-invariant and time-varying covariates (including both clinical and patient reported variables). We compare the performance of our models to the prior yearly-cohort-based time-invariant traditional coxph model with backward variable selection implemented by Seow et al.5. Performance of the machine learning models. The results of our comparisons on training and testing data sets are shown in Fig. 1, summarized by the 2.5%, 50% and 97.5% quantiles of the estimated Harrell’s C index on 200 bootstrap resamples of the respective data sets. The details of these comparisons are given in the Model evaluation and comparison section. The ML algorithms we used fall into 3 groups: penalized Cox model, i.e., elastic net (enet), lasso and ridge; gradient boosting machine (gbm); and random survival forest (rsf). We also compare with the traditional (non-ML) coxph model used by Seow et al.5, i.e., traditional coxph model with backward variable selection (BS coxph) as well as full traditional coxph (full coxph). Due to computational and implementation constraints, rsf was not implemented on the fully time-varying covariates analysis. On the yearly-cohort-based time-invariant analysis, gradient boosting machine (gbm) had the highest score in the test data across all the cohorts. For the training data, the BS coxph method matches the earlier results almost exactly (as expected). Random survival forest (rsf), although trained on a subset of the data (5000 cases), had the highest score on the training data but performed comparably to the other models (except gbm) on the On the fully time-varying covariates analysis, gbm’s predictive performance was again higher than all other models, on both training and testing data. The performance of the other models (including the traditional mod- els) was similar. The models were generally able to achieve better prediction when using the fully time-varying covariates than when using yearly-cohort-based time-invariant covariates. Separate cohort comparisons are provided in Supplementary Fig. S1. Figure 1.   A comparison of Harrell’s concordance scores (C index) for the yearly-cohort-based time-invariant (yearly) and fully time-varying (full) covariates analysis. Higher values are better. The yearly-cohort-based estimates obtained in Seow et al.5 were available for training data only. For comparison, we provide both training and test C index scores. Generally, gradient boosting machine slightly performs better than all the other models.

Scientific Reports | (2023) 13:1370 | Temporal performance of the models. To evaluate the performance of the models at different survival marks, we use the time-dependent AUC. We compare the year 0 cohort analysis (which combines all the cohorts, using their covariates at time 0) to the full dataset (using time-varying covariates). The difference between panels thus directly quantifies the effect of incorporating time-varying covariates. Figure 2 shows the distributional summary of the time-dependent AUC achieved in 200 replicates of boot- strapped samples of the test data. The central point represents the median (50%) quantile, while the lower and upper ends of the lines represent lower (2.5%) and upper (97.5%) quantiles of the estimates. Higher values indicate better performance, narrower ranges indicate more stable algorithms. In both fully time-varying and yearly-cohort-based time-invariant covariates, gbm model has slightly better estimates with comparatively narrower confidence intervals. Estimates based on the fully time-varying covariates are generally better than estimates based on the yearly-cohort-based time-invariant covariates. Figure 3 shows permutation-based importance scores (see “Methods”) for the top 15 features in each data set for both gbm (the top performing model), and for BS coxph (for the bench- mark model). Palliative care, cancer type, age and cancer stage were identified as important in all cases. To compare the features across the cohorts, we ranked all the features and counted the number of times each feature was among the top 5 across all the models and cohorts (Fig. 4). Compared to most machine learning algorithms, traditional coxph models are less suited for prediction, although the full (unselected) coxph may be better for inference about the impact of a specific predictor. In our analyses the rsf was unusual among ML models in performing badly, although it is particularly well suited to measuring the predictive importance of input variables. If our interest is to predict time-to-event of cancer patients based on a number of clinical, medical and self-reported predictors, machine learning-based models may be preferable over traditional coxph models in analyses that consider more data at once. Fitting models which incorporate fully time-varying covariates require special attention; only a subset of the models fitted in the yearly-cohort-based time-invariant models could support this kind of analysis. Thus, in the full data set incorporating time-varying covariates, in addition to traditional coxph, only gradient boosting and penalized models were implemented. Harrell’s C index was measured on mutually exclusive training and testing data sets. For overfitted models, we would expect the model to perform well on the training set but poorly on the testing set. Except for rsf, none of the models appear overfitted. Penalized models did not show major improvement in predictive performance over the traditional coxph model with backward variable selection model which was slightly better than the full Our results show that ML-based methods can provide more accurate alternatives to traditional hazard- based methods in both yearly-cohort-based time-invariant and full time-varying covariates. However, coxph model with backward variable selection performed comparably to the ML-based methods, as has also been seen Figure 2.   Time-dependent AUC scores evaluated at different time points. The scores are based on 200 bootstrapped samples (50 for rsf due to computational limitations) of the test data. Models with higher scores and narrower confidence intervals are better performers. As with the concordance index, models do better with the fully time-varying covariates (full), and gbm does better than other models.

Scientific Reports | (2023) 13:1370 | ­elsewhere5,23. Cox model with gradient boosting machine had the highest predictive performance score in all the comparisons done. This model has additional advantages of computational efficiency and fewer hyperparam- eters when compared to methods like random survival forests models. In particular, tuning hyperparameters for random forest, even using a subset of the training data, was not straightforward and took a considerable amount of time. We also tried training neural network models but were not successful due to difficulty in tuning of hyperparameters and computational limitations. In summary, time-varying covariates greatly improve model prediction, and not only in the ML context. We also find that gradient-boosting machine (gbm) improves performance across both the cohort and time-varying approaches, suggesting that it may be a good choice in general for problems of this nature. Subjects were adults diagnosed with cancer from a population-based, retrospective prognostic study, as confirmed by the provincial cancer registry in Ontario, Canada, from January 1, 2008, to The study was reviewed by Hamilton Integrated Research Ethics Board and deemed exempt because it used Patients and the public were not involved in this research. It used de-identified, secondary administrative data analysis, (which is allowed to be used for research purposes), and thus patient consent was not obtained. Seow et al.5 provide a detailed description of the data and study setting. End of Life care End of Life care Figure 3.   Variable importance scores together with the corresponding 2.5%, 50% and 97.5% quantiles, based on the best (gbm) and benchmark models (BS coxph). Notably, palliative care, age of the patient, cancer type and cancer stage stood out, across the cohorts, as some of the most important prognostic factors on survival of

Scientific Reports | (2023) 13:1370 | A number of pre-processing steps were undertaken to prepare the data set for mod- elling. To avoid excluding cases or variables from the data set, a “missing” category was created for the patient- reported categorical variables. Numerical variables, such as age, were mean-centered. We performed two classes of analysis which were based on the structure of the data, yearly cohort (yearly-cohort-based covariates) and full data set (fully time-varying covariates), as summarized in Fig. 5. Yearly cohort models.  To account for changing covariates in a traditional coxph model, Seow et al.5 created yearly cohort data sets. Each year that a patient survived post-diagnosis, they were entered into a separate cohort model; thus, only patients who survived to a certain point (survival mark) contributed to the corresponding conditional analysis, and their survival times were adjusted to reflect this conditioning. For example, for an individual who survived for 2.5 years: the Year 0 cohort contains baseline covariate information and a survival time of 2.5 years; the Year 1 cohort contains the current covariate information and a survival time of 1.5 years; and Year 2 cohort contains updated covariate information and a survival time of 0.5 years. Cohort definitions are summarized in the Fig. 6. Our first set of ML models used these yearly cohort data sets (rsf used a random sub-sample of 5000 cases of each yearly cohort data set), and compared the predictive performance with those obtained from traditional coxph models fitted in the prior analyses by Seow et al.5. In addition to our ML fits, we also replicated the traditional coxph model together with the backward variable selection procedure in Seow et al.5 with slight modifications. For instance, our models used 75 −25% as opposed to 60 −40% train–test Full data set models.  Both traditional coxph and ML models for survival analysis which incorporate time- varying covariates require the data set to be in a specific format—that is, counting process ­format24–26. The data are expanded from one record-per-subject to one record-per-interval between each event time, per subject, such End of Life care Figure 4.   The number of times, frequency, a given feature is ranked, on top 5, by a particular model in a given cohort as one of the most important feature. Low rank means a particular feature is predictive and hence

Scientific Reports | (2023) 13:1370 | that each record corresponds to the interval (365 days in this case) of time during which the entries of time- varying covariates are treated as constant. Once this special data set, which combines all the yearly cohorts, has been constructed, the event time is now defined by (start, stop] interval during which the subject was continu- ously at risk of the event. For example, for an individual who survived for 3 years, the “at-risk” interval is defined as (0, 365], (365, 730] and (730, 1095], representing the segments in which they are event free and uncensored. The difference between full data set and Year 0 cohort is that, in the former, the covariate information for every surviving patients is updated at each “at-risk” interval, while the latter contains the baseline covariate information about the patients. The updated, baseline-like (year1/2/3/4) cohorts from the original work are in fact useful: they show what predictions might have been made from updated covariate information at a given time. Analyzing how such predictions could be improved is therefore also of interest to us. Currently, only penalized, gradient boosting machine and random forest implementations support time- varying covariates. Due to computational challenges, we only fitted and compared penalized, i.e., lasso, ridge and elastic net and gradient boosting machine models, in addition to the traditional coxph model. All computations were carried out on a server with 4 clusters, each with 8 Intel Xeon 3.40 GHz CPUs and a 128 GB RAM. In addition to traditional Cox proportional hazard modeling, three machine learn- ing algorithms capable of handling censored data were used in this analysis. The outcome of interest was time to death (days) as recorded in the Vital Statistics ­database5. The following classes of models were trained and 1.	 Traditional coxph model with backward variable selection (BS coxph) and full traditional coxph (full coxph): Implemented for both time-invariant and time-varying covariates. 2.	 Cox-based gradient boosting machine (gbm): Implemented for both time-invariant and time-varying covari- 3.	 Penalized Cox model: elastic net (enet), lasso and ridge. Implemented for both time-invariant and time- 4.	 Random survival forests (rsf): Capable of handling both time-invariant and time-varying covariates but requires large amount of computer memory for large data sets due to large forests constructed during model training. Due to this challenge, we trained random forest on only a subset of data (5000 cases) for each cohort in the time-invariant covariates analysis. Table 1 provides a summary of models which were trained on yearly cohorts or full (time-varying) datasets. A brief description of these algorithms can be found in the Supplementary Methods S1. Figure 5.   The blue dotted rectangle indicates the major analytical contribution of this paper. We also replicated analyses by Seow et al.5, indicated by red rectangle. We performed two classes of analysis depending on the nature of the data set. The first set of analyses closely followed modelling procedure in Seow et al.5 which is based on yearly cohorts (we refer to these as yearly cohort models) and, by construction, takes care of changing covariates over the observation period. We then used ML models for survival analysis and compared predictive performance to prior results in Seow et al.5, which used traditional coxph model with backward variable selection. The second set of analyses used both traditional coxph and ML models for survival analysis which directly incorporate time-varying covariates on the full data set. We refer to these as full data set models. We also compared predictive performance of the full data set models to those of yearly cohort models.

Scientific Reports | (2023) 13:1370 | Each of the ML algorithms outlined above has at least one hyper-parameter and, as result, requires parameter tuning. For this, we perform 10-fold cross validation. For penalized approaches (lasso, ridge and elastic net), the hyper-parameters are tuned using cross-validated partial log-likelihood; for random survival forest and gradi- ent boosting machine, Harrell’s concordance index C is used. For the Cox proportional hazard model, we apply stepwise variable elimination on the multivariate model which fits all the covariates and identifies a subset of important variables according to Akaike’s information criterion. The final coxph model is then fitted using only those variables selected in the stepwise procedure. A list of hyper-parameters that were tuned can be found in Supplementary Table S1, together with the R packages used to implement each of the models. Model evaluation and comparison. The models implemented in this work have different strengths and limitations in terms of assumptions, interpretability, computational efficiency, etc. In this work, we focus on comparing the predictive accuracies of these models. We implemented the following metrics to evaluate and compare the performance of our models on the test data: Figure 6.   The yearly cohorts defined by Seow et al.5. Table 1.   A summary of trained models. Cox proportional hazards (coxph) Gradient boosting machine (gbm) Random survival forests (rsf)

Scientific Reports | (2023) 13:1370 | •	 Harrell’s concordance index (C index). In survival analysis, a pair of patients is called concordant if the risk of the event predicted by a model is lower for the patient who experiences the event at a later time-point. The concordance index is the frequency of concordant pairs among all comparable pairs of subjects. Pairs are incomparable if their event times are equal, or if either subject is censored before the other subject experi- ences an ­event27. Harrell’s C index can be used to measure and compare the discriminative power of a risk prediction ­models28. It provides a holistic measure of the model performance over the entire time period, while allowing for censoring. •	 Time-dependent AUC​. The Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve and the associated area under curve (AUC) are widely used in medical research to quantify the discriminating power of machine learning models. The ROC curve plots the probability of both true positive (proportion of positive class correctly classified by the model) and the false positives (proportion of the negative class incorrectly classified by the model) at various cut off values of the risk score. The AUC summarizes the probabilities of true and false positives over all possible cut off values into a value ranging between 0 and 1; and gives an overall measure of predictive accuracy of a predictive model. The standard ROC considers the event status and the risk scores as fixed over time; however, in many medical applications, these quantities may change over the follow-up time; in such situations, binary classification of cases (as true positive and true negative) without taking into account the time-to-event may be inappropriate. Heagerty et al.29 proposed a time-dependent ROC which extends the standard ROC curve analysis for binary outcome data to time-to-event data (see Supplementary To evaluate the sensitivity and uncertainty of the predictive performance measures, we applied bootstrap resa- mpling to estimate the 2.5%, 50% and 97.5% quantiles of the distribution of the scores. We used 200 bootstrap resamples of both training and test data sets. The training estimates were included for comparison with those reported in Seow et al.5. Model validation and prediction. For the yearly-cohort-based time-invariant analysis, the model valida- tion is similar to that by Seow et al.5. In particular, the models are derived using the corresponding yearly cohort training data, and then validated on the test data. However, as opposed to Seow et al.5 analysis which predicts the 1-year probability of death on the test data using an alternative estimator of concordance index for right-cen- sored data based on inverse probability of censoring weights (inverse probability of censoring weighted [IPCW] C index)30, this study uses Harrell’s C ­index27 which evaluates the model’s performance over the entire follow-up period using the current covariates for individuals in the risk set when the first event occurs; and is as well used for the time-varying covariates models, i.e., full analysis. The existing implementations of the IPCW C index do not extend to analysis of time-varying covariates. Hence, for comparison purposes, we report Harrell’s C index for the time-invariant and time-varying covariates analysis as shown in Fig. 1. We also include comparisons based on the IPCW C index for the time-invariant covariate models in Supplementary Fig. S2. For the yearly cohort models, all the time-varying covariates are adjusted at each new survival mark to avoid incorporating time-varying covariates into the models. Similarly, for the full dataset models, the information about the covari- ates is updated until the current follow-up time, as previously explained. This allows predictions to be based on current information about the covariates, and not beyond what is observed. Table 2 provides a summary of model evaluation metrics for yearly-cohort-based time-invariant and full (time-varying) analysis, together with the corresponding figures. A permutation-based variable importance score was used to identify the most important prognostic features. For each replicate, we randomly resample the values of a focal predictor and record how our metric changes due to this perturbation. The key idea is that if a particular predictor has high power to predict the response, then randomly permuting its observed values will lead to a considerable change in the predictive accuracy of the model. In this case, we conclude that this predictor is important. In our implementation, Harrell’s C index is used as a measure of predictive power. Some limitations of this study are related to the shortcomings in the available data, as dis- cussed in Seow et al.5. In particular, information about performance status and symptoms at various follow-up times were missing. Biomarker and targeted therapies data were not available; this auxiliary information could improve the predictive accuracy of the models. As previously mentioned, due to memory limitations, the ran- dom survival forest model was trained on a subset of the data. Moreover, even on this small subset of data (5000 cases), we could not properly tune hyperparameters for the neural network models (not presented here) using the computational resources available within our computational platform, which was specialized for hosting Table 2.   Evaluation metrics. Figs. 1 & S2

Scientific Reports | (2023) 13:1370 | The de-identified administrative data are not publicly available and may be obtained from a third party, ICES (formerly the Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences) for researchers who meet the criteria for permissible access. These data represent secondary data analysis and are not owned or collected by the study authors. A data request can be sent here: https://​www.​ices.​on.​ca/​About-​ICES/​ICES-​Conta​cts-​and-​Locat​ions/​conta​ct-​form. We provide all the R codes used for the analysis in the form of a workflow R package for the analysis of similar data sets, which can be accessed on GitHub through https://​github.​com/​CYGUB​ICKO/​satpr​ed. Received: 19 July 2022; Accepted: 18 January 2023 1.	 Seow, H. et al. Trajectory of performance status and symptom scores for patients with cancer during the last six months of life. J. Clin. Oncol. 29, 1151–1158. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1200/​JCO.​2010.​30.​7173 (2011). 2.	 Papachristou, N. et al. Learning from data to predict future symptoms of oncology patients. PLoS ONE 13, e0208808. https://​doi.​ 3.	 Hayward, J. et al. Machine learning of clinical performance in a pancreatic cancer database. Artif. Intell. Med. 49, 187–195. https://​ 4.	 Seow, H. et al. The effect of community-based specialist palliative care teams on place of care. J. Palliat. Med. 19, 16–21. https://​ 5.	 Seow, H. et al. Development and validation of a prognostic survival model with patient-reported outcomes for patients with cancer. JAMA Netw. Open 3, e201768. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1001/​jaman​etwor​kopen.​2020.​1768 (2020). 6.	 Cox, D. R. Regression models and life-tables. J. R. Stat. Soc. B 34, 187–202. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​2517-​6161.​1972.​tb008​99.x 7.	 Fujino, Y. et al. Predicting factors for survival of patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer: A management guideline. Hepato- Gastroenterology 50, 250–253 (2003). 8.	 Harrell, F. E. Regression Modeling Strategies: With Applications to Linear Models, Logistic and Ordinal Regression, and Survival Analysis (Springer Series in Statistics Springer International Publishing, 2015). 9.	 Simon, N., Friedman, J., Hastie, T. & Tibshirani, R. Regularization Paths for Cox’s proportional hazards model via coordinate descent. J. Stat. Softw. 39, 1–10. https://​doi.​org/​10.​18637/​jss.​v039.​i05 (2011). 10.	 Ishwaran, H. et al. Random survival forests for competing risks. Biostatistics 15, 757–773. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​biost​atist​ics/​ 11.	 Montazeri, M., Montazeri, M., Montazeri, M. & Beigzadeh, A. Machine learning models in breast cancer survival prediction. Technol. Health Care 24, 31–42. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3233/​THC-​151071 (2016). 12.	 Wang, P., Li, Y. & Reddy, C. K. Machine learning for survival analysis: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 51, 1–36. https://​doi.​org/​10.​ 13.	 Chow, E. et al. How accurate are physicians’ clinical predictions of survival and the available prognostic tools in estimating survival times in terminally III cancer patients? A systematic review. Clin. Oncol. 13, 209–218. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1053/​clon.​2001.​9256 14.	 Cheon, S. et al. The accuracy of clinicians’ predictions of survival in advanced cancer: A review. Ann. Palliat. Med. 5, 229–229 15.	 Cygu, S., Dushoff, J. & Bolker, B. M. pcoxtime: Penalized Cox Proportional Hazard Model for Time-dependent Covariates. (2021). 16.	 Yao, W., Frydman, H., Larocque, D. & Simonoff, J. S. Ensemble Methods for Survival Data with Time-Varying Covariates. (2021). 17.	 Andersen, P. K. & Gill, R. D. Cox’s regression model for counting processes: A large sample study. Ann. Stat. 10, 1–10. https://​doi.​ 18.	 Gupta, S. et al. Machine-learning prediction of cancer survival: a retrospective study using electronic administrative records and a cancer registry. BMJ Open 4, e004007. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1136/​bmjop​en-​2013-​004007 (2014). 19.	 Kourou, K., Exarchos, T. P., Exarchos, K. P., Karamouzis, M. V. & Fotiadis, D. I. Machine learning applications in cancer prognosis and prediction. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 13, 8–17. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​csbj.​2014.​11.​005 (2015). 20.	 Mihaylov, I., Nisheva, M. & Vassilev, D. Application of machine learning models for survival prognosis in breast cancer studies. Information 10, 93. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​info1​00300​93 (2019). 21.	 Katzman, J. L. et al. DeepSurv: Personalized treatment recommender system using a Cox proportional hazards deep neural network. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 18, 24. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12874-​018-​0482-1 (2018). 22.	 Bou-Hamad, I., Larocque, D. & Ben-Ameur, H. A review of survival trees. Stat. Surv. 5, 1–10. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1214/​09-​SS047 23.	 Spooner, A. et al. A comparison of machine learning methods for survival analysis of high-dimensional clinical data for dementia prediction. Sci. Rep. 10, 20410. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41598-​020-​77220-w (2020). 24.	 Thomas, L. & Reyes, E. M. Tutorial: Survival estimation for cox regression models with time-varying coefficients using SAS and R. J. Stat. Softw. 61, 1–10. https://​doi.​org/​10.​18637/​jss.​v061.​c01 (2014). 25.	 Allison, P. D. Survival Analysis Using SAS: A Practical Guide 2nd edn. (SAS Press, 2010). 26.	 Fox, J. An R and S-Plus Companion to Applied Regression (Sage Publications, 2002). 27.	 Therneau, T. M. A Package for Survival Analysis in R (2022). R package version 3.3-1. 28.	 Harrell, F. E. Jr., Lee, K. L. & Mark, D. B. Multivariable prognostic models: Issues in developing models, evaluating assumptions and adequacy, and measuring and reducing errors. Stat. Med. 15, 361–387. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​(SICI)​1097-​0258(19960​229)​ 29.	 Heagerty, P. J., Lumley, T. & Pepe, M. S. Time-dependent ROC curves for censored survival data and a diagnostic marker. Biometrics 56, 337–344. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​0006-​341X.​2000.​00337.x (2000). 30.	 Gerds, T. A., Kattan, M. W., Schumacher, M. & Yu, C. Estimating a time-dependent concordance index for survival prediction models with covariate dependent censoring. Stat. Med. 32, 2173–2184. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​sim.​5681 (2013). This work was supported by Discovery Grants to Jonathan Dushoff and Benjamin Bolker from the Natural Sci- ences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). The study was partially supported by the Canadian Institutes for Health Research (Grant #379009 and #383402), and also supported by ICES, formerly known as the Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, which receives funding from the Ontario Ministry of Health and the

Scientific Reports | (2023) 13:1370 | Ministry of Long Term Care. It uses data from Ontario Health and the Canadian Institutes of Health Information. We thank IQVIA Solutions Canada Inc. for use of their Drug Information File, and the Ontario Association of Community Care Access Centers. The opinions, results, and conclusions reported in this paper are those of the authors solely and the funders and data sponsors had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript for publication. S.C. designed and implemented machine learning experiments and wrote the first draft of the paper. H.S. pro- vided the data, expert guidance and reviewed the manuscript. J.D. provided expert guidance and critical review of the manuscript. B.M.B supervised the implementation of machine learning experiments and provided expert guidance for all aspects. All authors reviewed the manuscript. The authors declare no competing interests. Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​org/​ Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.C. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/. © The Author(s) 2023

---NEW PAPER---

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights into Risks and Aaron Green1, Christopher Cammilleri1, John S. Erickson1, Oshani Seneviratne1, and Kristin P. Bennett1 The Rensselaer Institute for Data Exploration and Applications Abstract. We propose a decentralized finance (DeFi) survival analy- sis approach for discovering and characterizing user behavior and risks in lending protocols. We demonstrate how to gather and prepare DeFi transaction data for survival analysis. We demonstrate our approach us- ing transactions in AAVE, one of the largest lending protocols. We de- velop a DeFi survival analysis pipeline which first prepares transaction data for survival analysis through the selection of different index events (or transactions) and associated outcome events. Then we apply survival analysis statistical and visualization methods such as median survival times, Kaplan-Meier survival curves, and Cox hazard regression to gain insights into usage patterns and risks within the protocol. We show how by varying the index and outcome events, we can utilize DeFi survival analysis to answer three different questions. What do users do after a deposit? How long until borrows are first repaid or liquidated? How does coin type influence liquidation risk? The proposed DeFi survival analy- sis can easily be generalized to other DeFi lending protocols. By defining appropriate index and outcome events, DeFi survival analysis can be applied to any cryptocurrency protocol with transactions. The rapid growth in popularity of blockchain-based products like cryptocurren- cies has brought with it a growth in the complexity of the blockchain ecosys- tem. Myriad new products are being developed and deployed on the numerous blockchains that now exist. Following the invention and adoption of these prod- ucts by an increasing number of users, a new financial ecosystem has emerged: Decentralized Finance (DeFi). The world of DeFi, though young, is already com- prised of hundreds, if not thousands, of products and services. One such product is known as a lending protocol. DeFi lending protocols offer a similar set of ser- vices as banks offer to consumers in the world of traditional finance. Users utilize the protocols to conduct transactions. For instance, a user of a DeFi lending pro- tocol can take some cryptocurrency they own and deposit it into the protocol, then accruing interest on their account balance. These users can also take out loans through the protocol, much like a person can take out a loan from a bank.

Since these lending protocols are growing in size along with the cryptocur- rency market as a whole, an obvious first question might be, “how and why are people using DeFi lending protocols?” There are multiple popular lending proto- cols, and their data streams are varied. But these data streams share a common structure; entities are conducting different types of transactions through time, each involving varying amounts and types of cryptocurrency. The fact that these entities (we will call them users, but they may be smart contracts) conduct trans- actions at irregular intervals and the many types of transactions makes DeFi lending streams challenging to understand. However, this complexity also exists in domains such as healthcare and commerce, so there are myriad tools available to analyze temporal data streams. In this paper, we demonstrate how to use one such tool, “survival analysis,” to gain insight into DeFi transactions. Survival analysis models time-to-event data. Survival analysis is widely used in healthcare to understand the risk of death (or other events of interest) after treatment, but can be used more generally to analyze the time between any two events [5]. For example, it can be used to analyze the time between a user’s borrow transaction and a transaction to repay that coin. As in healthcare, the data is frequently right-censored: users are likely to have an outstanding loan at any given time when we stop observing the data stream. In this analysis, we demonstrate how to gather and prepare DeFi transaction data for survival analysis and apply survival analysis statistical methods such as Kaplan-Meier survival curves and Cox Hazard regression to understand usage patterns within a protocol. Survival analysis has been previously used to understand loan defaults in Centralized Finance (CeFi) [2, 6, 10], but applying this analysis directly to DeFi is not straightforward since DeFi varies significantly from CeFi. In order to interpret the results of this first use of survival analysis in DeFi, we focus our analysis on looking solely at one lending protocol, developing generic survival analysis tools for transaction analysis, and examining the results of these tools for that protocol. These same tools can eventually be applied to other lending protocols. The protocol chosen was AAVE1. At the time of this writing (March 14, 2022), AAVE is the second-largest DeFi lending protocol, with approximately $8.42 billion worth of crypto-assets locked in the protocol according to DeFi Pulse2. We note, however, that survival analysis tools for DeFi transactions can be used to analyze and gain insight into any DeFi protocol that consists of transactions through time, including other lending protocols and This paper is organized as follows: in the methods section, we describe the AAVE data and the survival analysis methods used to study it. In the results section, we demonstrate the use provided by survival analysis to answer three different questions. We conclude with a discussion of the contributions of this work and promising directions for future work.

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights into Risks and User Behaviors The data used in this analysis comes primarily from The Graph3, a service that indexes data from blockchains and allows for the querying of the indexed data. For the work presented here, we sought to combine data from the primary seven transaction types that AAVE records in order to give a comprehensive view of all transactions that have taken place in AAVEv2 [1] since its deployment on November 30, 2020. The data used in this analysis starts with the first trans- actions of the AAVEv2 protocol on November 30, 2020, and ends on January 6, 2022. The seven transaction types we’ve pulled from The Graph include de- posits, redeems, borrows, repays, liquidations, interest-rate swaps, and reserve Combining these seven transaction types, we get a table that includes one transaction per row, totaling 847,798 transactions. Table 1 summarizes the num- ber of transactions of each type and their mean and median values. There are some common features for each transaction, such as the user involved and the time the transaction was made. Aside from liquidations, the transactions also have one specific coin involved. Liquidations have two coins: a principal coin and a collateral coin. AAVE transactions in our dataset have used 54 different coins. We divide these coins into two types: stablecoin and non-stablecoin. A stablecoin is from a class of cryptocurrencies that attempt to offer price stability (typically in terms of USD), and that is backed by a reserve asset. The other types of coins in the dataset are non-stablecoins. Deposits and redeems in AAVE function as one might expect deposits and withdrawals to function at a bank. A user can deposit a currency into the AAVE protocol, accruing interest on their deposit through time. Upon depositing a currency, AAVE mints the user some corresponding interest-bearing aTokens, which represents how much of a reserve they’ve deposited into the lending pool. These aTokens can be redeemed through the protocol to functionally withdraw their previously-deposited currency from the lending pool. Borrows and repays function as their names would suggest. It is important to understand that borrowing a currency in AAVE is governed by smart contracts. Anyone can borrow any amount of currency from the AAVE lending pool as long as they follow the criteria specified by the appropriate smart contracts. Users who borrow in AAVE use the currency they have deposited into the protocol as collateral. Not all currencies that can be deposited in AAVE are allowable as collateral. Additionally, users can choose which of their deposited assets they want to allow for usage as collateral. In order to qualify to borrow some asset, a user must have enough deposited assets in the system that are usable as collateral so that the loan would be over-collateralized. The extent of over-collateralization required depends on the specific currencies being used as collateral. More specific details about the requirements for borrowing in AAVE can be read about in the

Liquidations, the most complicated of the transactions in our data, have a lot of unique information in each transaction. When a user performs a liquidation, they are always liquidating the account of another user. This means there are two users recorded for each liquidation transaction: the user being liquidated (the liquidatee), and the user performing the liquidation (the liquidator). Ad- ditionally, whereas other transaction types only interact with a single currency at a time, liquidations involve two currencies. There is the principal currency that the liquidator is paying off and the collateral currency that the liquidator Collateral and swap transactions are the simplest transactions. Each one is functionally just the toggling of a setting in a user’s account. Collateral trans- actions are made when a user wants to toggle whether a deposited currency can be used as collateral for loans they’ve made or plan to make. Swap transactions allow users to switch loans between stable interest rates and variable interest rates for an individual currency. Table 1: Summary of transaction types in AAVEv2 data collected from November 30, 2020 to January 06, 2022 Transaction Type Occurrences Mean Value (USD) Median Value (USD) Transaction Type Occurrences Mean Principal (USD) Mean Collateral (USD) Survival analysis for DeFi Survival analysis is a collection of statistical procedures for data analysis in which the outcome variable of interest is the time from an index event until the outcome event [5]. To apply survival analysis to AAVE, we must pick two events: the index transaction and the outcome transaction. The survival time is the elapsed time between the index and outcome transactions. If, for example, we want to understand how soon users borrow money after making a deposit, then the index transaction is the user’s deposit, and the outcome transaction is the first borrow the user makes thereafter. The data is right-censored since we can only analyze data until the final date in our data. If a deposit transaction has no matching borrow, it could be because the user never borrowed or because the user borrow had not occurred during the period of analysis. Survival analysis correctly analyzes right-censored data.

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights into Risks and User Behaviors The power of DeFi results from the fact that it can be performed on the time duration between any desired pair of transactions analyzed by any of the widely used statistical survival analysis techniques. In Section 3, we demonstrate how we can address many different questions by changing the definition of the index and outcome transactions. For each analysis below, we define precisely the index and outcome transactions. Survival analysis estimates the survival function for each of these pairs of transactions. The survival function captures the probability of the outcome transaction not occurring through time. We utilize the ggsurvplot function from the survminer package in R to produce Kaplan-Meier curves, the most popular way to both estimate and visualize survival functions. For example, Figure 1 shows survival curves for each transactions type. They represent the time from the deposit to the first transaction of that type. If we are interested in how variables affect time to the outcome event, we utilize Cox regression (or proportional hazards regression). In Section 3.2, we utilize Cox regression to see if the coin type of borrows (stable or non-stable) is associated with faster We use survival analysis to dissect the relationships between certain pairs of transaction types. In doing so, we demonstrate the effectiveness of survival anal- ysis in visualizing and quantifying user behavior in AAVE. We explain how to transform the raw transaction data into forms suitable for survival analysis. Then we show different ways to use this data and survival analysis tools to un- cover patterns of user behavior through the selection of different index events, the narrowing down of outcome events, and the separation of the data by other What do users do after a deposit? We show that a Kaplan-Meier survival curve can provide a useful picture of how users behave after they deposit money into their accounts. Deposits are the natural first transaction for a user to make in a lending protocol, since before depositing any currency into an account, there aren’t really other possible actions one can take. Thus, looking at how users behave after making deposits seems a natural place to begin our analysis. To convert transaction data into survival data, we treat each deposit present in our data as an index event. This means we have 239,836 deposit events in the survival analysis. The outcome of each event occurs when the user makes their next transaction. The time difference between the deposit and the next transaction serves as the “survival” time for this analysis, and so if a user just makes a deposit and performs no subsequent transactions, that would manifest in our data as a deposit that has “survived” so far, and would be censored by time. For each deposit that is eventually followed by a subsequent transaction,

Table 2: Survival Data from Deposits to Next Transaction Time From Index Event (in hours) Censored? Next Transaction Type we also record the type of transaction that follows. This gives data in the form given in Table 2. Starting with the simplest survival analysis method, we used the R function surv_median to calculate the median time to the first transaction after a deposit. We computed the median time to any transaction and for each transaction type. We show these values in Table 3 ordered by median survival time. The percentage of the time this transaction type followed a borrow is provided as well. The median time between any two transactions is .017 hours. That means 50% of the time, a deposit by a user is followed by a transaction by that same user in less than 1.02 minutes. Note that for this specific analysis, we do not consider the type of coin used in the second transaction (outcome event.) From the median times to each transaction type following deposits, we can more clearly compare the magnitudes of elapsed time for different outcome trans- action types. The speed at which users tend to engage in redeem and collateral transactions after a deposit is less than a second. The median survival to the next deposit and borrows is on the order of minutes. In contrast, many users take more than two days to repay or be liquidated after a borrow. Table 3: Median time from deposit to next transaction in hours with percentage occurring for each transaction type Next Transaction Type Median Survival Time in hours Percentage We can gain further analysis by plotting survival curves for this data split by the type of subsequent transaction to gain a more nuanced understanding of how quickly users make each type of transaction following a deposit. When we

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights into Risks and User Behaviors separate the survival curve by the next transaction type, the usage of survival analysis deviates slightly from its original intent. This is because when we sepa- rate the curve by subsequent transaction type, we are effectively separating the curve by a variable that only exists because the index event has “not survived,” i.e., the existence of a “next transaction type” means the outcome event has occurred, and thus we’ve cut out the censored transactions. However, we believe the value of the visualization remains intact. Figure 1 shows seven different survival curves. As is the case for any survival curves, each curve begins at time 0 and has a probability of survival of 1. Then, as each curve progresses through time, the probability of “survival” drops in proportion to how many of the cases represented by each curve have reached their corresponding outcome event. If a curve drops quickly to a low survival probability, that means users tend to make that transaction type quickly after Fig. 1: Kaplan-Meier survival curves from a user’s deposits to their next transac- tion shows noticeable differences between which transactions users tend to make Looking at Figure 1, it is apparent that the most common transaction users make after a deposit is the collateral transaction. This makes sense, as one of the requirements in AAVE for a user to take out a loan is that the loan is over- collateralized; according to the requirements of the protocol, the user cannot take out a loan without having any currency in their account that is marked as collat- eral. Still, the “survival” of a deposit until a collateral transaction is brief. The survival curve for collateral dips straight down and hits zero almost immediately, indicating that users don’t wait long before making collateral transactions.

How long until borrows are repaid or liquidated? We turn our focus now to using borrows as the index events. A strength of survival analysis is that any transaction type can be used as an index event for survival analysis, and the choice of outcome events is also very flexible. Using only transaction-level data to analyze borrows makes it difficult to track a loan in its entirety. There is no end date to the loan. The user can make several borrows of a coin and then maintain the loan that accrues interest until they repay it in one or more repay transactions for that coin or until part or all of the loan is liquidated. When converting the transaction data into a form usable for survival analysis with borrows as the index events, we had to decide what was an appropriate outcome event. To avoid making assumptions about when a loan is totally repaid (either through liquidations or repay transactions), we define the outcome events as just the first repayment that a user makes or the first liquidation that is made for the borrowed currency. Thus, to be clear, the following analysis in Figure 2 does not show how long it takes for loans to be totally repaid through repays or liquidations, but just how long it takes for them to start being repaid through either means. We also choose to split the two curves by whether the borrowed coin is a stablecoin. The use cases for borrowing stablecoins versus non-stablecoins are quite different, so we hoped to see a drastic difference in the repayment schedules and liquidation tendencies for these different coin types, and indeed this is what we see in Figure 2. Clearly, from these survival curves, users tend to repay loans of stablecoins much more often than non-stablecoin loans. Almost all loans of stablecoins end up being repaid at least in part by the 402-day cutoff, which is as much data as we have. This is in stark contrast with the non-stablecoin borrows, for which only about 50% of all loans have seen even a single repayment. We see similarly contrasting behavior for the frequency that loans of each coin type are liquidated. Loans of stablecoins are liquidated significantly more often than loans of non- stablecoins. Unsurprisingly, liquidations as a whole occur far less frequently than repayments, so the survival probability of loans relative to liquidations is much higher than loans to repayments, but the same patterns are present with respect to the type of coin being borrowed. We can also use the survival data to create density plots for the median time to repayment or liquidation for each coin type, which provides additional clarity on exactly how long it takes for repayments or liquidations to occur. These median repayment and liquidation times can be seen in Figure 3. From these, we can see that, despite fewer repayments and liquidations of non-stablecoins, the median times to these events are quicker than they tend to be for stablecoins. Most people make their first repayment of borrowed non-stablecoin in about five days, whereas for borrowed stablecoins, the median time until the first repayment is about ten days. The timelines for liquidations to occur are longer, with the highest proportion of liquidated borrows of non-stablecoins occurring between 20 and 30 days following the borrow, and between 25 and 75 days for borrows of

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights into Risks and User Behaviors (a) Borrow to First Repay (b) Borrow to First Liquidation Fig. 2: Borrow to first repay and first liquidation analysis shows significant differ- ences between stablecoins (red) and non-stablecoins (blue). Note that the time ranges for repay is smaller than that of liquidation. stablecoins. Still, the contrasting behavior between stablecoin and non-stablecoin borrows are similar for the time taken to repays and time taken to liquidations. How does coin type influence liquidations? In the previous section, we saw the dramatic impact of coin-type of the principal on time to the first liquidation of a borrow. We hypothesize that the combination of the principal and the collateral may lead to further insight into the risk of borrows. Thus we further separate the borrow-to-liquidation data by factoring in what collateral was purchased and what principal types were specifically paid off by the liquidator. We perform the same index and outcome events as the prior liquidation analysis; only now do we analyze borrows associated with liquidation. This gives the curves seen in Figure 4. Since we are splitting the curves by what principal and collateral were paid off and purchased at the time of the liquidation, all the curves do end up with a 0% probability of survival, similar to the curves in

(a) Borrow to First Repay (b) Borrow to First Liquidation Fig. 3: Borrow to first repay and first liquidation analysis both show differences between stable and non-stablecoins. Figure 1. Once again, though, we can still use the curves to gain insight into the relative riskiness of the principal:collateral combinations that people can have in their accounts. According to the log-rank test, the differences in the curves are The definition of the outcome event in this analysis is quite different. To gain a more accurate picture of the liquidated user’s account, we aggregated liquidation events to gain more information as to which coins the users have as collateral in their account. Even though each liquidation transaction only records one principal type and one collateral type, sometimes a user will be the subject of multiple liquidations in quick succession. It would be inaccurate to consider these liquidations as separate events; they really are all part of one bigger liquidation event. Thus, in our transaction data, if a user is liquidated multiple times in quick succession with no intermittent non-liquidation transactions, we aggregate them into one bigger liquidation transaction. The outcome event is the combined liquidation transaction, with the time being the first liquidation transaction. This lets us see whether there were multiple types of collateral and principal coins involved in the event. Thus, if a user has both stablecoins and non-stablecoins in their account as collateral, or if they’ve taken out loans of both stablecoins and non-stablecoins, we mark the collateral or principal, respectively, as “Mixed.” Table 4 shows an example of where we can use a Cox proportional hazard model to more effectively quantify the differences between survival probabilities of each type of principal:collateral combination leading to liquidations. For the Cox proportional hazard model, we need to choose one of the combinations of principal:collateral to which to compare the others, which tells us proportionally how risky the other types of principal:collateral combinations are relative to the benchmark combination. If we select the stable:stable combination as the benchmark, we get the quantification of risk via the coxph function from the survminer package as seen in Table 4. The “Coefficient” column of this table indicates the relative riskiness of the loan types as compared to the benchmark type of stable principal and stable

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights into Risks and User Behaviors Fig. 4: Survival curves for different combinations of principal and collateral coin Table 4: Cox proportional hazards coefficients quantifying risk of liquidation. Bolded principal-collateral combinations have significant differences in risk of liquidation relative to stable:stable. Percentage of liquidation events indicates number of events of each type. Stable:stable constitutes 1.22% of liquidations. Principal:Collateral Combination Coefficient p-value Percentage collateral. Negative coefficients are indicative of lesser risk, meaning that any of the principal:collateral combinations that have a negative coefficient are less likely to be liquidated than the stable:stable combination. The p-value tells the statistical significance of these coefficients, with lower p-values indicating that the corresponding coefficients were less likely to be generated by chance. The results show that the combinations of stablecoin principal with non-stablecoin collateral tend to be liquidated significantly sooner than stablecoin principal with stablecoin collateral loans. Borrows with stablecoin principal with non-stablecoin collateral are much riskier since the price of the cryptocurrency in dollars is highly volatile. We see that liquidations for borrows with mixed collaterals reduce the risk for both types of principals. There were no significant differences in time to liquidation for stable:stable for the non-stablecoin:stablecoin and non-

With an over-collateralized loan, a borrower must post collateral, i.e., provide something of value as security to cover the value of the debt, where the value of the collateral posted exceeds the value of the debt. This way, collateralization simultaneously ensures that the lender (likely a smart contract) can recover their loaned value and provides the borrower with an incentive to repay the loan. The “health factor” (HF) is a custom threshold in lending systems. If the debt collateral falls below the HF (typically below 1), the debt position may be opened for liquidation. Then the liquidators can purchase the locked collateral at a discount and close the borrower’s debt position. Thus, leveraged positions are subject to liquidation when the debt becomes unhealthy, and a liquidator can repay the debt and benefit from a liquidation spread. Given this novel form of automatic lending, a growing body of literature has studied liquidations on borrowing and lending platforms in DeFi. Qin et al. [9] have analyzed risk management provided by liquidators, acting on the protocol’s user accounts. They have measured various risks that liquidation participants are exposed to on four major Ethereum lending pools (i.e., MakerDAO, AAVE, Com- pound, and dYdX) and quantified the instabilities of existing lending protocols. They have illustrated that the commonly used incentive mechanisms tend to fa- vor liquidators over borrowers, causing the problem of so-called over-liquidation, leading to unnecessary high losses for borrowers. The only recourse the borrowers have to avoid such liquidations is to monitor their loan-to-value ratio when the market changes quickly because even a random drop in market prices can result in a cascade of liquidations. If there are any drops in the market, it can lead to self-accelerating pressure to sell, which further causes more problems for a blockchain-based DeFi, such as network congestion that leads to steep gas costs. We witnessed such as even in the ETH market collapse of March 13, 20204 that left some borrowers unable to react, despite imminent liquidations. It can be particularly bad for borrowers who get liquidated if market prices recover after a dip again, leaving them deprived of subsequent upward price participation. In general, regardless of market conditions, liquidations in DeFi are widely prac- ticed, and related works such as Qin et al. [9] have quantified that over the years 2020 and 2021, liquidators realized a financial profit of over 800M USD while Stablecoins play a significant role in liquidations, as they have several char- acteristics that are directly tied to liquidation mechanics. For example, a user may not want to sell the token collateral, which is usually in the form of a sta- blecoin, but instead hold it indefinitely as a means of passive income, which might exceed the cost of borrowing, making the transaction profitable. Early empirical evidence on the stability of crypto-backed loans with stablecoins has been studied by Kozhan and Viswanath-Natraj [7]. They specifically focused on the price volatility in the MakerDao protocol, which introduced the world’s first decentralized stablecoin called Dai that is soft-pegged to the US Dollar, i.e.,

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights into Risks and User Behaviors it uses a collateralized debt position mechanism to keep the price stable with respect to the US Dollar. They have analyzed how collateral stability increases peg stability and found a positive relationship between collateral risk and the price volatility of the stablecoin Dai. The efficiency of lending pool liquidations has been studied by Perez et al. [8], in which they introduced a lending pool state model that is instantiated with his- torical user transactions observable in the Compound5 implementation deployed on Ethereum. Their model abstraction facilitates the observation of state effects of each interaction and investigates the latency of user liquidations following the under-collateralization of borrowing accounts. Similarly, Bartoletti et al. [3] provide an abstract formal state transition model of lending pools and prove fundamental behavioral properties, which had previously only been presented informally in the literature. Additionally, the authors examine attack vectors and risks, such as utilization attacks and interest-bearing derivative token risk. As the demand for loans in crypto-assets grows, the borrowing interest rate goes up. In a bullish crypto market, speculators may be keen to borrow funds even if there is a high interest rate, in expectation of an appreciation in the assets of their leveraged long position as demonstrated by Xu et al. [13]. Such an environment is advantageous for lenders, resulting in higher yields to them. Compound and AAVE, two major DeFi lending protocols, have witnessed the borrow APY of the stablecoin USDC increasing from a low of 2-3% in May 2020 to as high as 10% in April 2021 (as of this paper writing in March 2022, the APY is hovering at 2% in Compound and AAVE, but other protocols such as Celcius, BlockFi and Nexo offer upwards of 8% APY) 6. In a bullish market, the yield generated is incorporated in interest-bearing tokens, such as aTokens from AAVE analyzed in this paper. However, as was already noted, the wild fluctuations in the market result in unexpected liquidation events, as evidenced from this paper’s results. Most of the related works approach the issue of liquidation at a conceptual level or rely on aggregate flow data. In contrast, our paper uses transaction-level blockchain data to provide a more microscopic view on the issue combined with Discussion and Future Work This work defines a pipeline for survival analysis of DeFi lending protocols which includes data aggregation, cleaning, converting to a data abstraction model, and performing powerful survival statistical analyses and visualizations to gain insights. Using AAVE lending data in three different scenarios, we demonstrate how to gain insights into user behaviors and loan risks by defining appropriate index and outcome events and then applying survival analysis. Each scenario is characterized by distinct definitions of the index and out- come transactions in the survival analysis. We characterize user behaviors using

survival analysis of AAVE users’ next transaction. Our analysis of borrowed coin types shows the value of survival analysis for discovering factors contributing to events. Our survival analysis of borrows to repays and liquidations showed that borrows of stablecoins versus non-stablecoins exhibit very different characteris- tics. Users hold non-stable loans longer before the first repayment. But if they do repay, they tend to repay more quickly. We could get a deeper understand- ing of AAVE user behavior by taking a more refined look at the types of coins and transaction volumes, incorporating external factors such as coin prices in the survival analysis, and defining alternative index and outcome events. Using machine learning to create clusters that capture different behaviors (e.g., retail versus institutional investors), and then doing survival analysis could also be very illuminating. We leave these to future work. This work represents just the first step in the use of survival analysis in DeFi. We note that these DeFi survival analysis techniques could be generalized to other DeFi lending protocols. DeFi survival analysis can be applied to any cryptocurrency protocol with transactions. Hazard analysis and other types of survival analysis and visualization methods could be used. As future work, we will prepare a toolkit for DeFi survival analysis with associated dashboards and demonstrate it on other DeFi Protocols. One limitation of this research is that it does not address the rich DeFi ecosystem, which has many interacting protocols and coin prices. We are al- ready exploring the use of more advanced Artificial Intelligence (AI) methods for the analysis of transaction data developed for commerce and health [4, 12] that could incorporate more aspects of the DeFi ecosystem. These could be used for segmenting users and predicting behaviors and prices. Early results analyzing AAVE transactions using Neural Temporal Point Processes are very promising [11]. DeFi represents an exciting new domain for AI research in transaction modeling since DeFi is a compelling use case, and all the datasets are public by The code used to generate the figures in this paper is available in a public This work was partially supported by the Rensselaer Institute for Data Explo- ration and Applications. We would like to thank Roman Vakhrushev for his contributions to the liquidation analysis, Soumya Mishra, and Jaimin Vyas for contributions to early versions of the survival analysis. 1. AAVE Developers: AAVE Protocol Whitepaper V2.0. Tech. rep. (12 2020)

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights into Risks and User Behaviors 2. Allen, L.N., Rose, L.C.: Financial survival analysis of defaulted debtors. Journal of the Operational Research society 57(6), 630–636 (2006) 3. Bartoletti, M., Chiang, J.H.y., Lafuente, A.L.: Sok: lending pools in decentralized finance. In: International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security. pp. 553–578. Springer (2021) 4. Bennett, K.P.: Artificial intelligence for public health. In: 2019 IEEE Interna- tional Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM). pp. 1–2 (2019). 5. Clark, T.G., Bradburn, M.J., Love, S.B., Altman, D.G.: Survival analysis part i: basic concepts and first analyses. British journal of cancer 89(2), 232–238 (2003) 6. Dirick, L., Claeskens, G., Baesens, B.: Time to default in credit scoring using survival analysis: a benchmark study. Journal of the Operational Research Society 7. Kozhan, R., Viswanath-Natraj, G.: Decentralized stablecoins and collateral risk. WBS Finance Group Research Paper Forthcoming (2021) 8. Perez, D., Werner, S.M., Xu, J., Livshits, B.: Liquidations: Defi on a knife-edge. In: International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security. pp. 9. Qin, K., Zhou, L., Gamito, P., Jovanovic, P., Gervais, A.: An empirical study of defi liquidations: Incentives, risks, and instabilities. In: Proceedings of the 21st ACM Internet Measurement Conference. pp. 336–350 (2021) 10. Roszkowska, P., Prorokowski, L.: Model of financial crisis contagion: A survey- based simulation by means of the modified kaplan-meier survival plots. Folia Oe- conomica Stetinensia 13(1), 22–55 (2013) 11. Shou, X., Gao, T., Subramanian, D., Bennett, K.P.: Multi-label event prediction in continuous time. Under review (2022) 12. Shou, X., Mavroudeas, G., New, A., Arhin, K., Kuruzovich, J.N., Magdon-Ismail, M., Bennett, K.P.: Supervised mixture models for population health. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM). pp. 13. Xu, J., Vadgama, N.: From banks to defi: the evolution of the lending market. In: Enabling the Internet of Value, pp. 53–66. Springer (2022)

---NEW PAPER---

Attention-Based Deep Learning Models for Cryptocurrency Price Prediction: A Comparative Analysis with Technical Ming Che Lee * Posted Date: 23 October 2024 Keywords: Cryptocurrency Price Prediction; Technical Indicators; Attention-based LSTM; Attention-based Preprints.org is a free multidiscipline platform providing preprint service that is dedicated to making early versions of research outputs permanently available and citable. Preprints posted at Preprints.org appear in Web of Science, Crossref, Google Scholar, Scilit, Europe PMC. Copyright: This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Attention-Based Deep Learning Models for Cryptocurrency Price Prediction: A Comparative Analysis with Technical Indicators Applied Artificial Intelligence Department, Ming Chuan University; leemc@mail.mcu.edu.tw Abstract: This study presents a comparative analysis of two advanced attention-based deep learning models—Attention-LSTM and Attention-GRU—for predicting cryptocurrency price movements. The models utilize historical OHLCV data, combined with four technical indicators: SMA, EMA, TEMA, and MACD, to enhance the accuracy of classification into three categories: uptrend, downtrend, and neutral. Both models aim to capture market dynamics through sequential data while incorporating attention mechanisms to focus on relevant time steps. Experimental results demonstrate that the inclusion of technical indicators significantly improves model performance, with MACD yielding the highest accuracy. The Attention-GRU model shows computational advantages, while the Attention-LSTM model excels in capturing long-term dependencies. Keywords: Cryptocurrency Price Prediction; Technical Indicators; Attention-based LSTM; The emergence of cryptocurrencies, particularly Bitcoin, has radically transformed the financial landscape by introducing a decentralized, peer-to-peer (P2P) transaction system. First introduced by the pseudonymous Satoshi Nakamoto in 2009, Bitcoin operates without a central authority or intermediary, relying on blockchain technology for secure, transparent, and immutable financial exchanges [1]. The rise of Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies such as Ethereum and Litecoin has generated significant interest from both financial markets and academic researchers, largely due to their volatile nature and potential for high returns [2]. However, the high volatility and speculative nature of cryptocurrency markets present significant challenges for accurate price prediction [3]. Cryptocurrencies are unique in that their value is driven by a wide range of factors, including macroeconomic variables, technology adoption rates, regulatory developments, and public sentiment [4]. This multifaceted nature of cryptocurrencies complicates the task of price forecasting. Traditional financial models, such as ARIMA and GARCH, have been extensively applied to financial time-series data; however, they are inherently limited by their linear assumptions and inability to account for the non-stationary, highly volatile patterns observed in cryptocurrency prices [5]. As a result, there has been a significant shift toward machine learning and deep learning models, which have demonstrated superior performance in forecasting price movements in volatile markets like Deep learning, a subset of machine learning, has emerged as a powerful tool for cryptocurrency price prediction due to its ability to model complex patterns in large datasets. Among the most prominent deep learning techniques used in financial forecasting are recurrent neural networks (RNNs), particularly Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) models [7]. These models excel at capturing temporal dependencies in sequential data, making them well-suited for predicting time-series data like cryptocurrency prices. LSTMs and GRUs are especially valuable for cryptocurrency markets, where price trends are influenced by both short-term market sentiment and long-term market dynamics [8-9]. Researchers have also explored the use of on-chain data, such Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions, and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions, or products referred to in the content. Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024 © 2024 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.

as transaction volumes and miner activity, as indicators of future price trends [10]. The predictive power of deep learning models has also been enhanced through the development of hybrid architectures that combine deep learning techniques with other machine learning approaches. For instance, ensemble learning methods, which aggregate the predictions of multiple models, have been shown to reduce bias and variance in cryptocurrency price predictions [11]. These hybrid models, combining financial indicators, sentiment analysis, and technical analysis, have achieved notable success in predicting price movements with higher accuracy than traditional models. Additionally, the application of explainable AI techniques has the potential to enhance the interpretability of these models, offering investors and policymakers greater transparency in the decision-making process Technical indicators, widely used in traditional financial analysis, offer key insights into market behavior and price momentum. Indicators such as the Relative Strength Index (RSI), Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD), and Bollinger Bands provide valuable signals about overbought or oversold conditions in the market and help anticipate price reversals [13]. In this study, we propose a novel deep learning-based cryptocurrency price prediction model that incorporates key technical indicators to enhance prediction accuracy. By leveraging LSTM and GRU architectures, along with these additional market signals, the proposed model seeks to address the limitations of previous studies and provide more reliable and actionable insights for cryptocurrency traders and investors. In recent years, predicting cryptocurrency prices has gained significant attention due to the volatile and unpredictable nature of digital asset markets. Traditional models have struggled to capture these complexities, leading to a shift toward deep learning techniques. Ji et al. [14] show that LSTM performs best in regression tasks, while DNN excels in classification. Their findings reveal that classification models are more effective for algorithmic trading, though no single model performs consistently across all scenarios. This highlights the importance of tailoring models to specific prediction goals in dynamic markets. The introduction of deep learning techniques, particularly LSTM and GRU models, provided a more robust solution for predicting price trends in cryptocurrencies. LSTM and GRU, being recurrent neural networks, excel at capturing long-term dependencies in time-series data, making them well- suited for financial market predictions. Chen et al. [15] finds that statistical models like Logistic Regression perform well with high-dimensional daily data, but machine learning models such as LSTM are more suitable for high-frequency predictions. Their results emphasize the need to match model capabilities to the data’s frequency to prevent overfitting, particularly in markets driven by rapid price changes. The effectiveness of deep learning models also depends on the forecasting horizon. Awoke et al. [16] compare LSTM and GRU models, demonstrating that GRU offers faster convergence and better short-term accuracy, while LSTM is more reliable for capturing long-term patterns. This underscores the importance of selecting models that align with prediction windows to Following that, Jaquart et al. [17] explore LSTM, GRU, and Gradient Boosting Classifiers, finding that while these models capture short-term dynamics, their predictions align with the efficient market hypothesis. This suggests that despite achieving over 50% accuracy, transaction costs erode potential profits, reflecting the practical challenges of using predictive models in live trading. Also, time-based patterns provide another valuable dimension for prediction. Afterwards, Aljojo et al. [18] achieved 96% accuracy using a Nonlinear Autoregressive Exogenous (NARX) model to analyze how timestamps influence Bitcoin’s open, high, low, and close prices. Their results demonstrate that temporal data plays a pivotal role in identifying subtle market patterns, making such models highly effective for volatile markets. Furthermore, incorporating sentiment data into predictive models adds further depth. Loginova et al. [19] utilize aspect-based sentiment models, extracting sentiment-topic features from platforms like Reddit and CryptoCompare. Their integration of polarity and subjectivity scores not only enhances market trend interpretation but also improves algorithmic trading strategies, showing the growing importance of behavioral data in financial predictions. Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

The combination of multiple data sources with advanced neural architecture unlocks new predictive capabilities. Kim et al. [20] propose a SAM-LSTM framework that integrates change point detection (CPD) and self-attention mechanisms to process distinct on-chain data groups. Using the PELT algorithm to segment time-series data, their model achieves an MAE of 0.3462 and RMSE of 0.5035, highlighting the potential of combining technical and on-chain data to address market volatility. Also, hybrid architectures offer additional advantages, as demonstrated by Habek et al. [21]. Their CNN-RNN hybrid model achieves 93.77% accuracy by combining CNN for spatial feature extraction with bidirectional LSTM for temporal dependencies. The success of their approach highlights the power of integrating multiple architectures to enhance sentiment analysis and prediction performance. Moving on, Roy et al. [22] compare LSTM, Bi-LSTM, and GRU models, showing that LSTM achieves the lowest RMSE of 409.41, though GRU converges faster. Their study emphasizes the importance of selecting models based on both predictive accuracy and computational efficiency to handle volatile trends effectively. Avoiding overfitting without compromising accuracy is essential for robust performance. Frohmann et al. [23] address this by integrating sentiment analysis with time-series models, achieving an MAE of 2.67 and RMSE of 3.28. Their work underscores the need for balancing model complexity to maintain high accuracy in rapidly changing markets. Optimization techniques further enhance predictive models. Tang et al. [24] introduce a PSO- optimized GRU model, fine-tuning parameters such as neuron count, epochs, and batch size. Their approach achieves 10.47% higher accuracy than standard GRU models, demonstrating the value of optimization in managing volatile financial markets and supporting practical risk management strategies. Fang et al. [25] develop an LSTM framework with adaptive retraining, achieving 78% accuracy by processing high-frequency order book data. Their results illustrate the importance of continuous learning and real-time adjustment to sustain model performance in dynamic trading The integration of complementary architecture offers further potential for improving accuracy. Patel et al. [26] propose a hybrid LSTM-GRU model, trained on a five-year dataset from Yahoo! Finance. Their approach, using MinMax scaling and the Adam optimizer, achieves an RMSE of 409.41, outperforming standalone models and demonstrating the benefits of combining architectures in complex market environments. Subsequently, Arslan et al. [27] combine sentiment analysis with empirical mode decomposition (EMD) and LSTM networks, training parallel models on decomposed price data. Their ensemble model achieves lower RMSE and MAE, illustrating the value of integrating social sentiment with advanced neural networks for cryptocurrency prediction. In addition, effective feature selection enhances predictive performance, as shown by Omole and Enke [28]. Their CNN– LSTM hybrid model incorporates Boruta, genetic algorithms, and LightGBM, achieving 82.44% accuracy. Through backtesting, their long-and-short trading strategy yields an annual return of 6653%, demonstrating the practical value of combining feature selection with deep learning for Recent advances in cryptocurrency price prediction have largely focused on integrating deep learning techniques with sentiment analysis, on-chain data, and advanced decomposition methods. These approaches have shown considerable success in capturing the non-linear and volatile dynamics of cryptocurrency markets. Experimental results consistently indicate that hybrid models, which combine multiple data sources—such as social sentiment and high-frequency trading data— deliver the most accurate and actionable insights for traders and investors. However, despite these advancements, existing research often overlooks a comprehensive evaluation of the effectiveness of technical indicators. This gap highlights the need for deeper exploration, which forms the core focus of this study. By systematically analyzing the predictive power of various technical indicators, this research aims to address the shortcomings in current models and provide more robust tools for price Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

This section details the research methodology and the proposed models in this study, aimed at validating the effectiveness of moving average technical indicators in predicting financial asset trends, specifically in the cryptocurrency market. By leveraging deep learning models, this study assesses how well widely used indicators—Simple Moving Average (SMA), Exponential Moving Average (EMA), Triple Moving Average (TEMA), and Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD)— perform in forecasting price movements. These indicators are integrated to capture various aspects of cryptocurrency market trends, providing insights into both short-term and long-term price behavior by smoothing out volatility and identifying underlying patterns in market data. SMA offers a basic trend indicator by calculating the average price over a defined period, while EMA emphasizes recent prices, making it more responsive to current market conditions. TEMA refines trend detection by reducing the lag associated with EMA, and MACD serves as a key indicator for detecting potential trend reversals by comparing short-term and long-term EMAs. In this study, these technical indicators, combined with OHLCV (open, high, low, close, volume) data, are fed into the proposed Attention-based LSTM and Attention-based GRU models. The models are trained to predict future cryptocurrency price movements (up, down, or neutral) based on these historical inputs. The following sections detail the design of these algorithms and their role in evaluating the predictive power of moving averages in the volatile cryptocurrency market. 3.1. SMA, EMA, TEMA, and MACD Moving averages are widely used in financial forecasting due to their ability to smooth out price fluctuations and reveal the underlying trend of a market. By averaging past prices, moving averages help to reduce the noise caused by short-term volatility, allowing traders and analysts to better understand the overall direction of an asset’s movement. This makes them particularly useful in identifying potential turning points, such as trend reversals or continuations. In addition, moving averages can adapt to different timeframes, making them versatile tools for both short-term trading strategies and long-term investment decisions, offering clearer signals in volatile markets. Figure 1 shows the Bitcoin price trend in 06~09/2024. Figure 1. Bitcoin price trend from June 2024 to September 2024 with moving average trends (Data source: Yahoo Finance, recharted by this study) 3.1.1. Simple Moving Average (SMA) Simple Moving Average (SMA) smooths out price data by calculating the average price of an asset over a specified period. It assigns equal weight to all prices within the time window, offering a basic tool for identifying overall market trends. A rising SMA indicates an uptrend, while a declining SMA suggests a downtrend. However, its equal weighting means SMA can lag behind current market Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

conditions, making it slower to respond to recent price shifts. Traders use SMA to gauge general trend direction and potential support or resistance levels. Its calculation is as Equation (1): SM𝐴𝑡= (𝑃𝑡+ 𝑃𝑡−1 + ⋯+ 𝑃𝑡−(𝑛−1)) Where SMA𝑡 is the moving average at time t, Pt is the closing price at time t, and n represents the length of the time window. An uptrend and buy signal occur when the price is above the SMA, and the SMA is sloping upwards. A strong buy signal, known as a "Golden Cross," happens when a short- term SMA (e.g., 10-day) crosses above a long-term SMA (e.g., 50-day), indicating upward momentum. Conversely, a downtrend and sell signal occur when the price is below the SMA, and the SMA is sloping downwards. A sell signal, called a "Death Cross," arises when a short-term SMA crosses below a long-term SMA, signaling potential further price declines. Based on this concept, this study normalizes the SMA attributes as follows: 1, 𝑖𝑓 𝑃𝑡 > SMA𝑡 −1, 𝑖𝑓 𝑃𝑡 < SMA𝑡 0, 𝑖𝑓 𝑃𝑡 = SMA𝑡 3.1.2. Exponential Moving Average (EMA) Exponential Moving Average (EMA) is a more reactive moving average that gives greater weight to recent price data, making it more sensitive to market changes compared to SMA. This weighting allows the EMA to track the current price trend more closely, making it ideal for short- term trading strategies. The responsiveness of EMA helps traders spot potential reversals more quickly and act on them in volatile markets. Because of this, it’s preferred for markets that change direction rapidly, such as cryptocurrency. Its calculation is as follows: EMAt  =  𝛼× 𝑃𝑡  +  (1  − α) × EMAt−1 Where the smoothing factor 𝛼= 2/(𝑛+ 1). An uptrend and buy signal are indicated when the price is above the EMA, particularly if the EMA is sloping upwards. A buy signal occurs when a short-term EMA (e.g., 12-day) crosses above a long-term EMA (e.g., 26-day), suggesting upward momentum and a likely price increase. Conversely, a downtrend and sell signal are indicated when the price is below the EMA and the EMA is sloping downwards. A sell signal is triggered when the short-term EMA crosses below the long-term EMA, signaling growing downward momentum and the potential for further price declines. Based on this, this study normalizes the EMA attributes as 1, 𝑖𝑓 𝑃𝑡 > EMA𝑡 −1, 𝑖𝑓 𝑃𝑡 < EMA𝑡 0, 𝑖𝑓 𝑃𝑡 = EMA𝑡 3.1.3. Triple Exponential Moving Average (TEMA) Triple Exponential Moving Average (TEMA) is designed to reduce the lag associated with regular moving averages by applying three layers of exponential smoothing. TEMA responds faster to price changes, making it useful in volatile markets where traders need timely signals. By applying multiple EMAs, TEMA helps identify significant price trends with greater accuracy, reducing the delay often experienced in other moving averages. It’s particularly favored when quick adjustments to market shifts are necessary. Its calculation is as follows: TEMA𝑡= 3 × EMA𝑡−3 × EMA(EMA𝑡) + EMA(EMA(EMA𝑡)) An uptrend and buy signal occur when the price crosses above the TEMA, and the TEMA starts sloping upwards, indicating an uptrend with reduced noise compared to traditional moving averages. This crossover is viewed as a buy signal, suggesting that the price may continue to rise steadily. Conversely, a downtrend and sell signal are indicated when the price crosses below the TEMA and Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

the TEMA begins sloping downwards. This crossover serves as a sell signal, signaling that the price may continue to fall with less interference from small fluctuations. Based on this, this study normalizes the TEMA attributes as follows: 1, 𝑖𝑓 𝑃𝑡 > TEMA𝑡 −1, 𝑖𝑓 𝑃𝑡 < TEMA𝑡 0, 𝑖𝑓 𝑃𝑡 = TEMA𝑡 3.1.4. Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD) Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD) compares two EMAs to measure market momentum. It is used to detect shifts in the trend, where the difference between short-term and long- term EMAs indicates potential buying or selling opportunities. A positive MACD shows upward momentum, while a negative value suggests downward momentum. The MACD line crossing above or below a signal line provides clear entry and exit points for traders looking to capitalize on market movements. Its calculation is as follows: Where EMA12(𝑃𝑡) and EMA26(𝑃𝑡) are 12-day and 26-day exponential moving average of the closing price, respectively. An uptrend and buy signal are reflected when the MACD line is above the zero line (positive), indicating upward momentum. A buy signal is generated when the MACD line crosses above the signal line (bullish crossover), suggesting that the trend is gaining upward strength, and the price is likely to continue rising. Conversely, a downtrend and sell signal are indicated when the MACD line is below the zero line (negative), showing downward momentum. A sell signal occurs when the MACD line crosses below the signal line (bearish crossover), indicating the trend is weakening, and the price may continue to fall. Based on this, this study normalizes the MACD attributes as follows: 1, 𝑖𝑓 MACD𝑡 > MACD𝑆𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡 −1, 𝑖𝑓 MACD𝑡 < MACD𝑆𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡 0, 𝑖𝑓 MACD = MACD𝑆𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡 3.2. The Proposed Attention-Based Deep Models The following sections present two deep learning algorithms designed to predict cryptocurrency price movements using historical OHLCV data and technical indicators. These algorithms aim to capture both long-term and short-term market dynamics by integrating advanced attention mechanisms, which allow the models to focus on the most relevant time steps. Algorithm 1 employs an Attention-based LSTM architecture, leveraging LSTM’s strength in modeling sequential dependencies, while Algorithm 2 uses an Attention-based GRU architecture, which offers computational efficiency and faster training while maintaining predictive power. Both algorithms utilize technical indicators as input enhancements to improve the model’s ability to classify price movement into three categories: uptrend, downtrend, or neutral, with a final classification made using the Softmax function. Algorithm 1: Attention-based LSTM with Technical Indicator Enhancement for Price Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

𝑋𝑡: Historical price [𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑡, 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡, 𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑡, 𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑡, 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑡] 𝑇: Time window length 𝑦̂𝑡+1 ∈ {𝑈𝑝, 𝑁𝑒𝑢𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑙, 𝐷𝑜𝑤𝑛}: Predicted price movement for the next time step 1.1 Normalize 𝑋𝑡 and 𝐼𝑡 1.2 Construct combined feature set: 1.3 Create time windows for sequential data 𝑍𝑡−𝑇:𝑡 2.1 LSTM layer: For each time step 𝑡, LSTM computes the hidden state and cell Forget gate with sigmoid: 𝑓𝑡= 𝜎(𝑊𝑓[ℎ𝑡−1, 𝑍𝑡] + 𝑏𝑓) Input gate: 𝑖𝑡= 𝜎(𝑊𝑖[ℎ𝑡−1, 𝑍𝑡] + 𝑏𝑖) Cell state update: 𝐶̃𝑡= 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝑊𝐶[ℎ𝑡−1, 𝑍𝑡] + 𝑏𝐶) New cell state: 𝐶𝑡= 𝑓𝑡 ⨀ 𝐶𝑡−1 + 𝑖𝑡 ⨀ 𝐶̃𝑡 Output gate: 𝑜𝑡= 𝜎(𝑊𝑜[ℎ𝑡−1, 𝑍𝑡] + 𝑏𝑜) Hidden state ℎ𝑡= 𝑜𝑡 ⨀ 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝐶𝑡) Compute attention weights: 𝛼𝑡←softmax(𝑊𝑎⋅ℎ𝑡) Compute the context vector: 2.3 Decoder. Predict the price movement: 𝑦̂𝑡= [P(𝑈𝑝), P(𝑁𝑒𝑢𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑙), P(𝐷𝑜𝑤𝑛)] class(𝑦̂𝑡) = arg max(𝑦̂𝑡) 3.1 Initialize the model parameters 𝜃. 3.2 For each training sample, compute the cross-entropy loss: ℒ(𝑦̂𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) = −∑𝑦𝑡,𝑖 3.3 Update the parameters using gradient descent: 3.4 Walkthrough Training: ℒ> 𝜖, retrain the model 4.1 Predict the next price movement class: 4.2 Evaluate the model Algorithm 2: Attention-based GRU with Technical Indicator Enhancement for Price Movement Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

𝑋𝑡: Historical price [𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑡, 𝐻𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡, 𝐿𝑜𝑤𝑡, 𝐶𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒𝑡, 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑡] 𝑇: Time window length 𝑦̂𝑡+1 ∈ {𝑈𝑝, 𝑁𝑒𝑢𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑙, 𝐷𝑜𝑤𝑛}: Predicted price movement for the next time step 1.1 Normalize 𝑋𝑡 and 𝐼𝑡 1.2 Construct combined feature set: 1.3 Create time windows for sequential data 𝑍𝑡−𝑇:𝑡 2.1 GRU layer: For each time step 𝑡, GRU computes the hidden state using two gates: Reset gate with sigmoid: 𝑟𝑡= 𝜎(𝑊𝑟[ℎ𝑡−1, 𝑍𝑡] + 𝑏𝑟) Update gate: 𝑧𝑡= 𝜎(𝑊𝑍[ℎ𝑡−1, 𝑍𝑡] + 𝑏𝑧) Candidate hidden state: ℎ̃𝑡= 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝑊ℎ[𝑟𝑡 ⨀ ℎ𝑡−1, 𝑍𝑡] + 𝑏ℎ) Final Hidden state ℎ𝑡= 𝑧𝑡 ⨀ ℎ𝑡−1 + (1 −𝑧𝑡) ⨀ ℎ̃𝑡 Compute attention weights: 𝛼𝑡←softmax(𝑊𝑎⋅ℎ𝑡) Compute the context vector: 2.3 Decoder. Predict the price movement: 𝑦̂𝑡= [P(𝑈𝑝), P(𝑁𝑒𝑢𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑙), P(𝐷𝑜𝑤𝑛)] class(𝑦̂𝑡) = arg max(𝑦̂𝑡) 3.1 Initialize the model parameters 𝜃. 3.2 For each training sample, compute the cross-entropy loss: ℒ(𝑦̂𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) = −∑𝑦𝑡,𝑖 3.3 Update the parameters using gradient descent: 3.4 Walkthrough Training: ℒ> 𝜖, retrain the model 4.1 Predict the next price movement class: 4.2 Evaluate the model In the proposed algorithms, ℎ𝑡 is the hidden state at time t, 𝛼𝑡 is the attention weight at time t, 𝑐𝑡 is the context vector computed by the attention mechanism, 𝜎 is the sigmoid function, ⨀ represents the Hadamard product, Tanh refers to the hyperbolic tangent, and 𝑦̂𝑡 and ℒ represent the predicted price movement class and cross-entropy loss function, respectively. Both Algorithm 1 (Attention-based LSTM) and Algorithm 2 (Attention-based GRU) operate within a deep learning framework optimized for sequence modeling, with slight architectural differences influencing their behavior. Each model processes sequential data by transforming input features through several hidden layers, leveraging recurrent connections to capture complex relationships in time series data. Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

The attention mechanism enhances performance by redistributing focus across varying time steps, helping the models mitigate issues related to vanishing gradients. Algorithm 1 employs LSTM cells to address challenges in retaining long-term dependencies. The architecture manages internal states using carefully tuned input, forget, and output gates, regulating the information flow between time steps. Algorithm 2 incorporates GRU cells, which simplify the recurrent structure without sacrificing learning capacity. The GRU’s design combines memory gates, minimizing computational overhead while still preserving essential temporal information. This lightweight architecture not only enables faster convergence but also makes it well-suited for dynamic market conditions where rapid adaptation is crucial. The experiments were conducted on an ASUS system equipped with an Intel® Core™ i9 processor, 32GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060 Super graphics card, running on Windows 10 Enterprise. The dataset comprised 2,192 Bitcoin transaction records from September 30, 2018, to September 30, 2024, sourced from Yahoo Finance. It included daily high, low, open, and close prices, along with trading volume, offering a detailed representation of Bitcoin's price movements and market behavior during this period. The model incorporated four technical indicators - SMA, EMA, TEMA, and MACD, each calculated daily and normalized using their respective moving averages. This normalization was crucial in ensuring the model processed the indicators effectively, smoothing out volatility and maintaining consistency across the data. The window size was set to 10, and the training was conducted over 200 epochs, with a batch size of 32. The dataset was split into 80% for training, 20% for validation, and all data were used for backtesting, ensuring a balanced approach to model evaluation. The system's computational power was leveraged to handle the deep learning model's complexity, ensuring efficient processing and training over the specified period. In this study, we evaluated the performance of classification models using key metrics to ensure a detailed understanding of their effectiveness. The metrics used include Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1 Measure. All measures are calculated as follows: 𝑇𝑃+ 𝑇𝑁+ 𝐹𝑃+ 𝐹𝑁 𝐹1 = 2 × 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛× 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 Where True Positives (TP) are positive cases that were correctly classified, while True Negatives (TN) are negative cases that were correctly classified. False Positives (FP) refer to negative cases that were incorrectly classified as positive, and False Negatives (FN) are positive cases incorrectly classified as negative. In this study, Recall, Precision, F1 Measure, and Accuracy are key evaluation metrics used to assess the performance of the model in forecasting price movements. Recall measures the model’s ability to correctly predict upward trends when they actually occur, ensuring that most trading opportunities are captured, and potential profits are not missed. Precision focuses on the accuracy of the model’s upward trend predictions, helping to minimize false signals and reduce unnecessary trading risks. To balance Precision and Recall, this study employs the F1 Measure as a composite metric, using its harmonic means to provide a more reliable performance evaluation, especially when dealing with imbalanced data. Finally, Accuracy quantifies the proportion of correct Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

predictions across all outcomes, offering an overall measure of the model's effectiveness in both upward and downward trend forecasting. 4.2.1. Results of Attention-based LSTM Model The analysis below presents the experimental findings for the Attention-based LSTM model. Figures 2~6 demonstrate the model's performance across various configurations: without any technical indicators, and with SMA, EMA, TEMA, and MACD included respectively. Each figure showcases both the training and validation accuracy trends along with their corresponding confusion matrices. These results provide a detailed view of the model’s classification effectiveness across the "Up," "Neutral," and "Down" categories, highlighting the impact of each technical indicator on the model’s accuracy and generalization. Figure 2. Accuracy and Confusion Matrix for Attention-LSTM Without Technical Indicators. In the absence of technical indicators, the training curve shows a steady increase from around 0.50 to a peak of approximately 0.65 over 200 epochs. However, fluctuations towards the end suggest potential overfitting. The confusion matrix shows that the model correctly classifies 68.20% of the "Up" cases, 65.86% of the "Neutral" cases, and 66.90% of the "Down" cases. However, there are significant misclassifications, such as 15.97% of "Up" cases being misclassified as "Neutral," and 18.61% of "Down" cases being misclassified as "Up." This highlights that the model struggles to differentiate between the "Up" and "Down" categories, often confusing the two, as shown in Figure Figure 3. Accuracy and Confusion Matrix for Attention-LSTM with SMA. With the SMA technical indicator, the training curve improves quickly from 0.50 to nearly 0.70, stabilizing towards the end of the 200 epochs. SMA significantly helps the model converge faster. The confusion matrix shows the model achieving 69.16% accuracy for the "Up" category, 71.01% for "Neutral," and 69.81% for "Down." Despite this improvement, there are notable misclassifications, such as 15.70% of "Neutral" cases being classified as "Up" and 14.96% of "Down" cases misclassified as "Up." The tendency to mistake "Down" for "Up" suggests that SMA slightly improves general accuracy but still faces challenges in distinguishing between "Up" and "Down". As shown in Figure Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

Figure 4. Accuracy and Confusion Matrix for Attention-LSTM with EMA. In Figure 4, the training curve under the EMA indicator rises from 0.50 to 0.70, demonstrating faster convergence and increased stability over time compared to no indicators. In the confusion matrix, the model achieves an accuracy of 71.11% for "Up," 72.70% for "Neutral," and 69.13% for "Down." However, the confusion matrix reveals that 14.48% of "Neutral" cases were misclassified as "Up," and 15.17% of "Down" cases were misclassified as "Neutral." This suggests that while the overall accuracy improves, the model struggles to differentiate between "Neutral" and "Down" categories, leading to higher confusion between these classes. Figure 5. Accuracy and Confusion Matrix for Attention-LSTM with TAMA. The TEMA indicator shows the training curve rising rapidly to 0.65 within the first 50 epochs, eventually stabilizing at around 0.70. The confusion matrix reveals that the model predicts 70.11% of "Up" cases correctly, 70.38% of "Neutral" cases, and 70.90% of "Down" cases. However, significant misclassifications remain, such as 15.01% of "Up" cases being predicted as "Neutral" and 14.76% of "Down" cases being misclassified as "Up." This indicates that the model struggles to clearly separate the "Up" and "Neutral" categories, suggesting that TEMA improves the stability of the training curve but still leads to confusion among similar classes, as shown in Figure 5. Figure 6. Accuracy and Confusion Matrix for Attention-LSTM with MACD. Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

In Figure 6, MACD yields the most stable training curve, rapidly rising to around 0.70 and peaking at approximately 0.73, with minimal fluctuations. The confusion matrix reflects high accuracy across categories: 74.27% for "Up," 72.85% for "Neutral," and 73.32% for "Down." Despite this, "Down" was misclassified as "Up" (13.48%), and "Neutral" was mistaken for "Down" (13.21%). These misclassifications suggest that even with MACD, the model occasionally struggles to distinguish between "Down" and "Neutral" labels. 4.2.2. Results of Attention-based GRU Model The following analysis presents the experimental results of the Attention-based GRU model. Figures 7~11 illustrate the performance of the model under different settings: without technical indicators, and with SMA, EMA, TEMA, and MACD applied respectively. These figures detail the training and validation accuracy curves alongside their corresponding confusion matrices, providing insights into the model’s classification ability across the "Up," "Neutral," and "Down" categories for Figure 7. Accuracy and Confusion Matrix for Attention-LSTM Without Technical Indicators. The model without technical indicators, as represented in Figure 7, shows training accuracy rising steadily to 0.65 within the first 50 epochs, eventually stabilizing around 0.69. The validation accuracy, however, fluctuates more noticeably, peaking around 0.66 and showing a wider gap compared to the training accuracy, indicating some overfitting. The confusion matrix reveals that the model correctly predicts 69.24% of "Up" cases, 70.10% of "Neutral" cases, and 70.68% of "Down" cases. Despite these results, the model still misclassifies 15.85% of "Up" cases as "Neutral" and 14.11% of "Down" cases as "Up." This misclassification between the "Up" and "Down" categories suggests that without technical indicators, the model struggles to accurately differentiate these similar market movements, indicating a potential limitation in the model's ability to capture finer distinctions between upward and downward trends. Figure 8. Accuracy and Confusion Matrix for Attention-LSTM with SMA. With the addition of SMA, as shown in Figure 8, the training curve initially rises quickly to approximately 0.65 within the first 50 epochs. After this initial increase, the training accuracy gradually stabilizes around 0.69, similar to the previous model without technical indicators. The validation curve fluctuates more significantly, peaking at around 0.65, and continues to display Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

instability compared to the training accuracy. The confusion matrix for the SMA-enhanced model shows that 69.21% of "Up" cases, 72.40% of "Neutral" cases, and 68.41% of "Down" cases are predicted correctly. Despite this improvement in the "Neutral" class prediction, misclassifications still exist, such as 16.36% of "Down" cases being classified as "Up" and 15.53% of "Neutral" cases misclassified as "Down." These misclassifications suggest that while the SMA indicator helps improve the model’s general performance, especially for the "Neutral" category, the model still struggles to cleanly separate "Down" and "Up" cases. This indicates that the model may benefit from more refined feature extraction to reduce the overlap in predictions for these market trends. Figure 9. Accuracy and Confusion Matrix for Attention-LSTM with EMA. Incorporating the EMA, as represented in Figure 9, the training curve shows an initial sharp rise to approximately 0.65 within the first 50 epochs, followed by a gradual increase that stabilizes around 0.69. The validation curve, on the other hand, exhibits significant fluctuations, peaking at around 0.65 but failing to achieve a stable upward trend, indicating some challenges in the model’s generalization. The confusion matrix for the EMA-enhanced model reveals that 69.18% of "Up" cases, 70.04% of "Neutral" cases, and 73.71% of "Down" cases are predicted correctly. However, misclassifications persist, with 12.66% of "Down" cases being classified as "Up" and 15.38% of "Neutral" cases misclassified as "Up." This suggests that the model, while performing well in distinguishing "Down" cases, still encounters difficulties in clearly differentiating between "Up" and "Neutral" categories. These classification errors indicate that the EMA indicator may have provided some benefit for identifying downward trends, but further refinement is needed to improve the model’s ability to distinguish between market trends, particularly in the "Up" and "Neutral" categories. Figure 10. Accuracy and Confusion Matrix for Attention-LSTM with TEMA. For the TEMA, as shown in Figure 10, the training curve exhibits a steady climb, reaching approximately 0.65 within the first 50 epochs and eventually stabilizing at around 0.70. The validation curve shows more volatility, with notable fluctuations around 0.65, indicating a less stable generalization performance compared to the training accuracy. The model shows a clear improvement in learning, but the gap between the training and validation accuracy implies potential overfitting, as the validation curve remains unstable throughout the epochs. Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

The confusion matrix reveals that the TEMA-enhanced model correctly predicts 69.49% of "Up" cases, 70.44% of "Neutral" cases, and 71.41% of "Down" cases. Despite these relatively high accuracy rates, there are still some notable misclassifications, particularly in "Down" cases, where 15.73% were classified as "Up." Additionally, 16.10% of "Neutral" cases were misclassified as "Up." This suggests that while TEMA has improved the model's ability to predict market trends, especially for "Neutral" and "Down" categories, it still struggles with clear separation between similar classes, such as "Up" and "Neutral," leading to classification errors. Figure 11. Accuracy and Confusion Matrix for Attention-LSTM with MACD. In Figure 11, the MACD demonstrates a training accuracy curve that increases rapidly within the first 50 epochs, reaching approximately 0.68 and stabilizing around 0.74 after 100 epochs. The validation accuracy fluctuates between 0.67 and 0.70, closely aligning with the training accuracy, which indicates improved generalization. The reduced gap between the training and validation curves suggests a balanced model with minimal overfitting, offering greater stability compared to The confusion matrix shows that the MACD-enhanced model achieves the highest average performance, correctly classifying 74.27% of "Up" cases, 72.85% of "Neutral" cases, and 73.32% of "Down" cases. While some misclassifications persist, particularly between "Up" and "Down" signals— where 14.55% of "Up" cases were predicted as "Down" and 13.48% of "Down" cases were predicted as "Up" - this model provides the best overall results in terms of accuracy. The consistent performance across categories and minimal fluctuation makes the MACD-based model the top performer among all tested technical indicators. Table 1. Performance Comparison of Attention-based LSTM Model with SMA, EMA, TEMA, and Att_LSTM LSTM_SMA LSTM_EMA LSTM_TEM Table 2. Performance Comparison of Attention-based GRU Model with SMA, EMA, TEMA, and Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

4.2.3. Comprehensive Performance Analysis Tables 1-2 present the comprehensive performance metrics of the Attention-based LSTM and GRU models across different configurations: without technical indicators, and with SMA, EMA, TEMA, and MACD indicators. This comparison offers insight into how each model performs under various setups and highlights the strengths and challenges associated with the use of these technical indicators. Both models demonstrate improvements in accuracy and other key metrics with the inclusion of technical indicators, especially with MACD. For the Attention-based LSTM, the highest accuracy of 73.84% is achieved with MACD, reflecting its superior classification capability. Similarly, the Attention-based GRU also shows the best performance with MACD, achieving an accuracy of 73.21%. Across the board, the inclusion of technical indicators improves precision, recall, and F1- measure for both models compared to their performance without indicators. The Attention-based GRU model shows slightly higher recall across the configurations, with GRU_MACD achieving the highest recall at 54.37%. This indicates that the GRU model is marginally better at capturing positive instances across the categories compared to the LSTM, as the highest LSTM recall (54.26%) is also achieved with MACD. However, the differences in recall between the models are relatively small, suggesting both architectures have comparable sensitivity. Precision measures how well the models avoid false positives, and here, Attention-LSTM_MACD outperforms the GRU counterpart with 73.27% precision compared to 68.27% for GRU_MACD. This reflects that the LSTM model demonstrates slightly better precision overall, suggesting it may be better at In terms of the F1-measure, which balances recall and precision, both models show consistent improvements with technical indicators. The LSTM_MACD achieves the highest F1-measure of 62.35%, followed closely by GRU_MACD at 60.53%. The similarity in F1-measure highlights that both models achieve comparable trade-offs between precision and recall with the MACD indicator. Accuracy trends reveal a key insight: both models achieve higher performance with the MACD indicator, with LSTM_MACD slightly outperforming GRU_MACD (73.84% vs. 73.21%). The GRU model shows more stable performance across the indicators, with smaller fluctuations in accuracy. This stability may reflect the GRU’s ability to handle sequential dependencies effectively, offering consistent results even with simpler indicators like SMA and TEMA. The experimental results reveal that technical indicators play a crucial role in enhancing the models' predictive capability. Indicators provide meaningful insights into market trends, improving the models' ability to differentiate between "Up," "Neutral," and "Down" movements. This added information helps the models generalize better and reduce overfitting, resulting in more stable predictions. Notably, the inclusion of indicators like MACD offers deeper trend analysis, which refines decision boundaries and minimizes ambiguity across classes. This demonstrates that integrating technical indicators optimizes model performance by aligning predictions more closely with underlying market patterns. The experimental findings show that integrating technical indicators meaningfully enhances the performance of both Attention-based LSTM and GRU models. Across the trials, the MACD indicator consistently provided the best results, achieving an accuracy of 73.21% with the GRU model and 73.84% with the LSTM model. SMA and TEMA also delivered stable performance, each contributing to a slight improvement in prediction precision. Notably, the GRU model showed faster convergence while maintaining an accuracy comparable to the LSTM, offering computational efficiency for real- time trading systems. These results highlight the effectiveness of attention-based architectures with indicator enhancements, underscoring the value of momentum-based indicators in volatile Acknowledgments: This work is supported by the National Science Council of Taiwan for providing the research Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

Kayal, P., & Rohilla, P. (2021). Bitcoin in the economics and finance literature: a survey. SN business & Pečiulis, T., Ahmad, N., Menegaki, A. N., & Bibi, A. (2024). Forecasting of cryptocurrencies: Mapping trends, influential sources, and research themes. Journal of Forecasting. Fang, F., Ventre, C., Basios, M., Kanthan, L., Martinez-Rego, D., Wu, F., & Li, L. (2022). Cryptocurrency trading: a comprehensive survey. Financial Innovation, 8(1), 13. Bollen, J., Mao, H., & Zeng, X. (2011). Twitter mood predicts the stock market. Journal of computational Patel, N. P., Parekh, R., Thakkar, N., Gupta, R., Tanwar, S., Sharma, G., ... & Sharma, R. (2022). Fusion in cryptocurrency price prediction: A decade survey on recent advancements, architecture, and potential future directions. IEEE Access, 10, 34511-34538. Arslan, S. (2024). Bitcoin Price Prediction Using Sentiment Analysis and Empirical Mode Decomposition. Computational Economics, 1-22. Jaquart, P., Dann, D., & Weinhardt, C. (2021). Short-term bitcoin market prediction via machine learning. The journal of finance and data science, 7, 45-66. Hamayel, M. J., & Owda, A. Y. (2021). A novel cryptocurrency price prediction model using GRU, LSTM and bi-LSTM machine learning algorithms. Ai, 2(4), 477-496. Seabe, P. L., Moutsinga, C. R. B., & Pindza, E. (2023). Forecasting cryptocurrency prices using LSTM, GRU, and bi-directional LSTM: a deep learning approach. Fractal and Fractional, 7(2), 203. Kim, G., Shin, D. H., Choi, J. G., & Lim, S. (2022). A deep learning-based cryptocurrency price prediction model that uses on-chain data. IEEE Access, 10, 56232-56248. Rathee, N., Singh, A., Sharda, T., Goel, N., Aggarwal, M., & Dudeja, S. (2023). Analysis and price prediction of cryptocurrencies for historical and live data using ensemble-based neural networks. Knowledge and Information Systems, 65(10), 4055-4084. Aslam, F., Memon, B. A., Hunjra, A. I., & Bouri, E. (2023). The dynamics of market efficiency of major cryptocurrencies. Global Finance Journal, 58, 100899. Nti, I. K., Adekoya, A. F., & Weyori, B. A. (2020). A systematic review of fundamental and technical analysis of stock market predictions. Artificial Intelligence Review, 53(4), 3007-3057. Ji, S., Kim, J., & Im, H. (2019). A comparative study of bitcoin price prediction using deep learning. Mathematics, 7(10), 898. Chen, Z., Li, C., & Sun, W. (2020). Bitcoin price prediction using machine learning: An approach to sample dimension engineering. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 365, 112395. Awoke, T., Rout, M., Mohanty, L., & Satapathy, S. C. (2020). Bitcoin price prediction and analysis using deep learning models. In Communication Software and Networks: Proceedings of INDIA 2019 (pp. 631-640). Jaquart, P., Dann, D., & Weinhardt, C. (2021). Short-term bitcoin market prediction via machine learning. The journal of finance and data science, 7, 45-66. Aljojo, N., Alshutayri, A., Aldhahri, E., Almandeel, S., & Zainol, A. (2021). A nonlinear autoregressive exogenous (NARX) neural network model for the prediction of timestamp influence on bitcoin value. IEEE Loginova, E., Tsang, W. K., van Heijningen, G., Kerkhove, L. P., & Benoit, D. F. (2024). Forecasting directional bitcoin price returns using aspect-based sentiment analysis on online text data. Machine Kim, G., Shin, D. H., Choi, J. G., & Lim, S. (2022). A deep learning-based cryptocurrency price prediction model that uses on-chain data. IEEE Access, 10, 56232-56248. Habek, G. C., Toçoğlu, M. A., & Onan, A. (2022). Bi-Directional CNN-RNN architecture with group-wise enhancement and attention mechanisms for cryptocurrency sentiment analysis. Applied Artificial Roy, P. K., Kumar, A., Singh, A., & Sangaiah, A. K. (2023). Forecasting Bitcoin Prices using Deep Learning for Consumer Centric Industrial Applications. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. Frohmann, M., Karner, M., Khudoyan, S., Wagner, R., & Schedl, M. (2023). Predicting the price of Bitcoin using sentiment-enriched time series forecasting. Big Data and Cognitive Computing, 7(3), 137. Tang, X., Song, Y., Jiao, X., & Sun, Y. (2024). On forecasting realized volatility for bitcoin based on deep learning PSO–GRU model. Computational Economics, 63(5), 2011-2033. Fang, F., Chung, W., Ventre, C., Basios, M., Kanthan, L., Li, L., & Wu, F. (2024). Ascertaining price formation in cryptocurrency markets with machine learning. The European Journal of Finance, 30(1), 78-100. Roy, P. K., Kumar, A., Singh, A., & Sangaiah, A. K. (2023). Forecasting Bitcoin Prices using Deep Learning for Consumer Centric Industrial Applications. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. Arslan, S. (2024). Bitcoin Price Prediction Using Sentiment Analysis and Empirical Mode Decomposition. Computational Economics, 1-22. Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

Omole, O., & Enke, D. (2024). Deep learning for Bitcoin price direction prediction: models and trading strategies empirically compared. Financial Innovation, 10(1), 117. Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content. Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 23 October 2024

---NEW PAPER---

International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) E-ISSN: 2582-2160 ● Website: www.ijfmr.com ● Email: editor@ijfmr.com Volume 6, Issue 3, May-June 2024 Cryptocurrency Fluctuations: Investigating a Decade of Top Cryptocurrency Fluctuations and Bijin Philip1, Priya Pandey2 1Assistant Professor, Department of Management, Kristu Jayanti College Autonomous 2Final Year BBA Students, Department of Management, Kristu Jayanti College Autonomous The global cryptocurrency market has witnessed substantial growth, projected to expand from $910.3 million in 2021 to $1,902.5 million by 2028, with a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 11.1% during the forecast period. Notably, the United States leads in revenue generation, expected to reach US$23,220.00 million in 2024. With an estimated 992.50 million users by 2028, the market's trajectory indicates increasing adoption worldwide, particularly in developing nations where digital currencies serve as emerging financial exchange mediums. The surge in popularity of digital assets, such as Bitcoin and Litecoin, alongside their integration with Blockchain technology for decentralized and efficient transactions, propels market expansion. Furthermore, Artificial Intelligence (AI) advancements have begun reshaping the cryptocurrency landscape, with AI-based platforms gaining prominence and driving innovation. The growing acceptance of cryptocurrencies as legitimate payment methods by businesses, including major corporations like Tesla Inc. and MasterCard Inc., further accelerates the market growth. This research paper explores the significance of cryptocurrencies, analyzes the fluctuations of leading cryptocurrencies, and elucidates the diverse factors influencing their value, thus contributing to a deeper understanding of this dynamic and evolving market landscape. The findings highlight the complex interplay of these factors, offering insights into the dynamics of cryptocurrency markets and guiding future investment decisions. This comprehensive analysis provides a nuanced understanding of the cryptocurrency landscape, emphasizing both opportunities and inherent risks. Keywords: Cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, Virtual Currency. Cryptocurrencies have indeed transformed the financial landscape, with Bitcoin leading the way as the pioneer. Despite its lack of regulatory oversight, Bitcoin has garnered substantial global attention, attracting investors and traders from all corners of the world. However, this unregulated environment has also brought about significant risks, including concerns about money laundering and fraud. India, like many other nations, has been grappling with the challenge of ensuring security for consumers and businesses in the cryptocurrency space. The absence of clear regulations has made it difficult to address these risks effectively. Nevertheless, researchers have been delving into the perspectives of investors to better understand the future trajectory of cryptocurrencies in India.

International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) E-ISSN: 2582-2160 ● Website: www.ijfmr.com ● Email: editor@ijfmr.com Volume 6, Issue 3, May-June 2024 Beyond Bitcoin, the cryptocurrency market boasts a plethora of alternative digital currencies, often referred to as "Altcoins." These Altcoins, which number over 1,448, are traded on more than 7,642 exchange platforms worldwide. They play a crucial role in reshaping the global economy by offering alternatives to traditional monetary systems and decentralizing monetary policy. The legal status of cryptocurrencies varies significantly from one country to another, reflecting the diverse approaches taken by policymakers and regulators worldwide. Here are some examples of how different countries have addressed the regulatory framework for cryptocurrencies: • United States: In the United States, cryptocurrencies are subject to a patchwork of regulatory agencies and laws. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regulates securities offerings, including some initial coin offerings (ICOs), while the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) over- sees commodities and derivatives markets, including Bitcoin futures trading. Additionally, various states have their own regulations governing cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology. • China: China has taken a strict approach to cryptocurrencies, imposing bans on ICOs and cryptocur- rency exchanges. While individuals can still hold cryptocurrencies, the government has cracked down on crypto trading and mining activities. • Japan: Japan has adopted a relatively progressive stance towards cryptocurrencies. It legalized Bitcoin as a form of payment in 2017 and introduced a regulatory framework to license cryptocurrency ex- changes. This move aimed to protect consumers while fostering innovation in the blockchain and cryp- • European Union: The regulatory approach to cryptocurrencies within the European Union (EU) var- ies among member states. However, the EU has taken steps to combat money laundering and terrorist financing through its Fifth Anti-Money Laundering Directive (5AMLD), which includes provisions for regulating cryptocurrency exchanges and custodian wallet providers. • Switzerland: Switzerland has emerged as a crypto-friendly jurisdiction, with cities like Zug earning the moniker "Crypto Valley" due to their support for blockchain and cryptocurrency startups. The Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority (FINMA) has established guidelines for ICOs and has granted licenses to several cryptocurrency exchanges. • India: India's approach to cryptocurrencies has been somewhat uncertain. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has expressed concerns about the risks associated with cryptocurrencies and has, at times, issued directives limiting banks' interactions with crypto businesses. However, the government has also indi- cated an interest in exploring the potential of blockchain technology for various applications. These examples illustrate the diverse regulatory landscape surrounding cryptocurrencies globally. As the industry continues to evolve, policymakers face the challenge of balancing innovation and investor protection while mitigating risks such as money laundering, fraud, and market manipulation. Collaboration between stakeholders will be crucial in developing effective regulatory frameworks that foster responsible innovation in the cryptocurrency space. (Sovbetov, 2018) This study delves into the factors influencing the prices of the most common five cryp- tocurrencies—Bitcoin, Ethereum, Dash, Litecoin, and Monero—spanning from 2010 to 2018, utilizing weekly data. Initially, factors inherent to the cryptomarket, such as market beta, trading volume, and vol- atility, emerge as significant determinants for the attractiveness of all five cryptocurrencies, both in the short and long term. Additionally, the age of cryptocurrencies also plays a role in their price determination,

International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) E-ISSN: 2582-2160 ● Website: www.ijfmr.com ● Email: editor@ijfmr.com Volume 6, Issue 3, May-June 2024 albeit primarily in the long run. This underscores that the perception and recognition of the attractiveness of cryptocurrencies are influenced by temporal dynamics. (Qureshi et al.,2020) In this paper, we delve into the intricate dynamics of multiscale interdependencies among five prominent and liquid cryptocurrencies, namely Bitcoin, Ethereum, Ripple, Litecoin, and Bitcoin Cash. Our study employs wavelet-based analyses, offering a robust framework that considers the heterogeneous behavior of crypto-traders and investors. By utilizing wavelet techniques, we are able to capture the complex interactions and dependencies across different time scales within the cryptocurrency market. Our analysis provides insights into how these leading cryptocurrencies interact with each other at various frequencies, shedding light on the underlying mechanisms driving their interconnectedness. Through this investigation, we aim to contribute to a deeper understanding of the evolving dynamics within the cryptocurrency ecosystem, which is crucial for both market participants and policymakers in navi- gating this rapidly evolving financial landscape. The price dynamics of cryptoassets represent a complex. (Kukacka, J., & Kristoufek, L. (2023) The price dynamics of cryptoassets represent a complex interplay between speculative forces and fundamental factors. While speculation undoubtedly exerts a significant influence, with traders often driving short-term price movements based on market sentiment and technical analysis, it would be misguided to discount the role of fundamental components entirely. Adoption rates, technological advancements, and regulatory developments all contribute to the intrinsic value and long- term prospects of cryptocurrencies. As the crypto market matures, these fundamental factors are likely to play an increasingly important role in price formation, alongside the continued presence of speculative behavior. Thus, a holistic understanding of both speculative and fundamental aspects is essential for nav- igating the dynamic landscape of cryptoasset investments. (Kyriazis, 2021) The analysis of returns and volatility in cryptocurrency markets entails a multifaceted examination, considering various key characteristics and optimal methodologies. Cryptocurrencies exhibit unique traits, notably high volatility and non-traditional market dynamics, necessitating specialized mod- eling approaches. Interconnectedness among cryptocurrencies is paramount, as correlations and depend- encies influence pricing dynamics. Effective hedging and diversification strategies are imperative for risk mitigation, given the inherent unpredictability of these assets. Measurement tools for profit-making and risk assessment, such as Sharpe and Sortino ratios, aid in portfolio optimization and decision-making. Efficiency considerations, including market anomalies and informational efficiency, guide trading strate- gies and asset allocation. Additionally, understanding herding behavior sheds light on market sentiment and potential price distortions, informing investor decisions. By comprehensively examining these facets, researchers and practitioners can uncover valuable insights into cryptocurrency markets, facilitating in- formed strategies and risk management practices. (Kjærland, et al.,2018) The study reveals a compelling correlation between the level of interest in Bitcoin, as gauged by Google searches, and the cryptocurrency's price. This positive relationship suggests that heightened public curiosity about Bitcoin tends to coincide with increases in its market value. However, it's crucial to underscore that correlation does not necessarily indicate causation; while the two variables may move in tandem, other underlying factors could be at play driving both phenomena.Interestingly, despite its surging popularity and widespread attention, the study fails to uncover substantial evidence supporting Bitcoin's classification as a safe haven investment. Unlike traditional safe haven assets such as gold or government bonds, which typically see increased demand during times of economic uncertainty or market volatility, Bitcoin does not consistently exhibit similar behavior. This finding challenges the notion that Bitcoin serves as a reliable hedge against market turmoil or geopolitical instability, A. (2021).

International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) E-ISSN: 2582-2160 ● Website: www.ijfmr.com ● Email: editor@ijfmr.com Volume 6, Issue 3, May-June 2024 A survey on volatility fluctuations in the decentralized cryptocurrency financial assets. Journal of Risk and Financial Management, 14(7), 293. highlighting the complexity of its role within the broader financial (Kyriazis, 2021) Research suggests that Bitcoin has experienced multiple bubble phases, particularly in 2013 and 2017, where its price rapidly inflated and then deflated. Similar bubble patterns have been ob- served in other major digital currencies like Ethereum and Litecoin. Scholars commonly use methods such as the Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) test and the Log-Periodic Power Law (LPPL) model to identify and measure these bubbles. According to extensive academic studies, Bitcoin has been considered to be in a bubble phase since June 2015. Additionally, Ethereum, NEM, Stellar, Ripple, Litecoin, and Dash have displayed bubble-like characteristics since around September 2015. However, there is limited academic evidence supporting the presence of bubbles in these cryptocurrencies since early 2018. Overall, this re- search, supported by a comprehensive bibliography, provides valuable insights into cryptocurrency market dynamics, which can be beneficial for policymakers, academics, and investors in making informed deci- (Kyriazis, et al., 2020) Research suggests that Bitcoin has experienced multiple bubble phases, particu- larly in 2013 and 2017, where its price rapidly inflated and then deflated. Similar bubble patterns have been observed in other major digital currencies like Ethereum and Litecoin. Scholars commonly use meth- ods such as the Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) test and the Log-Periodic Power Law (LPPL) model to identify and measure these bubbles. According to extensive academic studies, Bitcoin has been considered to be in a bubble phase since June 2015. Additionally, Ethereum, NEM, Stellar, Ripple, Litecoin, and Dash have displayed bubble-like characteristics since around September 2015. However, there is limited academic evidence supporting the presence of bubbles in these cryptocurrencies since early 2018. Overall, this research, supported by a comprehensive bibliography, provides valuable insights into cryptocurrency market dynamics, which can be beneficial for policymakers, academics, and investors in making informed (Yang, et al., 2020) Understanding how the cryptocurrency market works has become more important since Bitcoin came into existence in 2009. A recent study introduces a method called the two-stage de- composition and composition (2SDC) to help understand how cryptocurrencies form and behave. This method starts by using a technique called Noise-Assisted Multivariate Empirical Mode Decomposition (NA-MEMD) to break down daily closing price data from six cryptocurrencies—Bitcoin, Ethereum, Bitcoin Cash, Litecoin, Monero, and Dash—from July 23rd, 2017, to July 23rd, 2019. In the first stage, it divides each cryptocurrency's data into different frequency components, like high and low frequencies, to see how they change over time. Then, in the second stage, it combines these components based on a statistical test called the Wilcoxon signed-rank test to understand short-term fluctuations caused by things like investor feelings, significant events, and the underlying value of the cryptocurrency. The study shows that these short-term fluctuations, along with high and low frequency components, are important in deter- mining cryptocurrency prices, which supports previous research findings. • To analyses the top five crypto currency fluctuations during the last ten years. • To study the factors influencing the value of crypto currency.

International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) E-ISSN: 2582-2160 ● Website: www.ijfmr.com ● Email: editor@ijfmr.com Volume 6, Issue 3, May-June 2024 The methodology for this research involved a comprehensive analysis of historical price data for Bitcoin, Ethereum, Tether, Binance Coin, and US Dollar Coin from 2009 to 2024, sourced from reliable financial databases. Data was collated and visualized to identify trends and anomalies. Statistical tools were used to measure volatility, correlation, and growth rates. Additionally, the study examined external factors such as regulatory changes, market sentiment, technological advancements, and macroeconomic indicators through literature review and case studies. This multi-faceted approach enabled a holistic understanding of the factors influencing cryptocurrency values, providing a robust framework for interpreting market dynamics and guiding investment strategies. 5. Results & Discussion The value of cryptocurrencies is influenced by a complex interplay of factors including market dynamics, regulatory environments, technological advancements, media influence, economic conditions, network effects, and security issues. Understanding these diverse factors is crucial for stakeholders looking to nav- igate the volatile landscape of cryptocurrency investments. Market Demand and Supply One of the primary factors influencing the value of cryptocurrencies is market demand and supply. The value of a cryptocurrency is significantly impacted by the number of people wanting to buy (demand) versus those wanting to sell (supply). For instance, during the bull market of late 2017, Bitcoin's price surged due to heightened demand driven by speculative investment and media hype (Nakamoto, 2008; Vigna & Casey, 2016). Regulatory announcements and changes also play a crucial role. Positive regulatory news, such as legal recognition and adoption by financial institutions, tends to increase cryptocurrency values. Conversely, announcements of stricter regulations or bans, as seen with China's crackdown on cryptocurrency ex- changes, typically result in a decrease in value (Zohar, 2015; Gandal & Halaburda, 2016). The underlying technology of cryptocurrencies, including improvements in blockchain technology, scala- bility solutions, and security enhancements, can influence their value. For example, Ethereum's value saw significant growth due to its smart contract capabilities and continuous development (Buterin, 2014; Market Sentiment and Media Influence Market sentiment, often driven by media coverage and social media trends, can cause significant fluctua- tions in cryptocurrency prices. Positive media coverage tends to boost prices, while negative news, such as hacks or fraud allegations, can cause sharp declines (Kristoufek, 2013; Garcia et al., 2014). Macroeconomic factors such as inflation rates, currency devaluations, and geopolitical instability can also affect the value of cryptocurrencies. For instance, Bitcoin has been termed "digital gold" due to its per- ceived value retention in times of economic uncertainty (Cheah & Fry, 2015; Bouri et al., 2017). Network Effects and Adoption Rates The level of adoption and the network effect, where the value of the cryptocurrency increases as more people use it, is another important factor. Cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and Ethereum benefit from a

International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) E-ISSN: 2582-2160 ● Website: www.ijfmr.com ● Email: editor@ijfmr.com Volume 6, Issue 3, May-June 2024 strong network effect due to their large user base and wide acceptance (Catalini & Gans, 2016; Easley et Security and Risk Factors Security issues, such as hacking incidents and fraudulent activities, can significantly impact cryptocur- rency values. High-profile security breaches often result in a loss of investor confidence and a subsequent drop in value (Conti et al., 2018; Vasek et al., 2014). The analysis of diverse factors influencing the value of cryptocurrencies highlights the complex and mul- tifaceted nature of this emerging asset class. Interplay of Demand and Regulatory Factors Market demand and supply dynamics are foundational to understanding price movements. This basic eco- nomic principle is exacerbated by the speculative nature of the cryptocurrency market, where regulatory news can either mitigate or amplify demand. For instance, regulatory clarity provided by countries like Japan has positively influenced the market by reducing uncertainty and encouraging adoption (Nian & Technological and Sentimental Influence Technological advancements ensure the functional and secure operation of cryptocurrencies, directly af- fecting their adoption rates and market confidence. Simultaneously, media and sentiment analysis reveals that cryptocurrencies are highly susceptible to public perception and media narratives. This dual influence underscores the need for robust technological frameworks and responsible media reporting to stabilize the market (Glaser et al., 2014; Yermack, 2015). Economic and Network Considerations Economic instability in traditional financial markets often drives investors towards cryptocurrencies, per- ceived as alternative or hedge assets. The network effect is particularly potent in this space, suggesting that the more a cryptocurrency is used and accepted, the higher its potential value. This effect is evident in the widespread use of Bitcoin and Ethereum, which continue to dominate due to their first-mover ad- vantage and extensive user communities (Narayanan et al., 2016; Cong et al., 2019). Security and Risk Management Security remains a critical concern, as evidenced by numerous high-profile breaches that have shaken investor confidence. Effective risk management strategies and improved security protocols are imperative for sustaining growth and ensuring investor protection in the cryptocurrency market (Bonneau et al., 2015; Table 1: Bitcoin price history – 2009 to 2024

International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) E-ISSN: 2582-2160 ● Website: www.ijfmr.com ● Email: editor@ijfmr.com Volume 6, Issue 3, May-June 2024 Figure 1 - Bitcoin price history – 2009 to 2024 The table no 1 depicts the price history of Bitcoin from its inception in 2009 to 2024. In 2009, Bitcoin started at a minuscule value of 0.0041 dollars, gradually gaining traction. In 2010, its price surged to 0.4 dollars, indicating early interest. The volatility became apparent in 2011 when it spiked to 32 dollars but halved the next year to 16 dollars. The infamous 2013 saw a meteoric rise to 1,163 dollars, only to crash back to 13 dollars in 2014. The following years showed fluctuating patterns; in 2017, it skyrocketed to a staggering 19,892 dollars, then dipped in 2018 to 18,343 dollars. Subsequently, Bitcoin's value oscillated between 13,000 and 68,789 dollars until 2024, where it climbed to 73,750 dollars, demonstrating both its potential for astronomical growth and inherent volatility. Table 2: Ethereum price history – 2017 to 2024

International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) E-ISSN: 2582-2160 ● Website: www.ijfmr.com ● Email: editor@ijfmr.com Volume 6, Issue 3, May-June 2024 Figure 2 Ethereum history – 2009 to 2024 The table no 2 outlines the price trajectory of Ethereum from 2017 to 2024. Ethereum began 2017 with a robust value of 756.73 dollars, reflecting its growing prominence in the cryptocurrency market. However, it experienced a downturn in 2018, dropping to 455.53 dollars, likely influenced by market fluctuations and regulatory concerns. The trend continued in 2019, with Ethereum plummeting to 178.62 dollars amid broader market uncertainty. Despite this, Ethereum showed signs of recovery in 2020, climbing to 339.86 dollars, possibly driven by renewed investor interest and technological advancements. The breakout year for Ethereum was 2021 when it surged to 2,832.16 dollars, fueled by increased institutional adoption and the burgeoning decentralized finance (DeFi) sector. Although 2022 saw a decline to 198.11 dollars, Ethereum rebounded in 2023, reaching 1,835.18 dollars. Finally, in 2024, Ethereum experienced a remarkable spike, soaring to 23,608.02 dollars, underscoring its enduring relevance and potential for Table 3: Tether price history – 2017 to 2024

International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) E-ISSN: 2582-2160 ● Website: www.ijfmr.com ● Email: editor@ijfmr.com Volume 6, Issue 3, May-June 2024 Figure 3 -Tether price history – 2017 to 2024 The table 3 depicts the price stability of Tether (USDT), a type of stablecoin, from 2017 to 2024. Stablecoins like Tether are designed to maintain a consistent value, usually pegged to a fiat currency like the US dollar. In 2017, Tether started at 1.01, indicating a minor deviation from its intended value due to market dynamics. However, from 2018 onwards, Tether remained consistently pegged at 1.00, reflecting its primary purpose as a stable store of value. This stability persisted throughout the years 2018 to 2023, indicating Tether's reliability as a hedge against cryptocurrency volatility. However, in 2024, there was a notable deviation as Tether's price dropped to 0.50, which could suggest a loss of confidence in the stablecoin or external factors affecting its peg. Overall, the table illustrates Tether's role as a stable unit of account amidst the fluctuating values of other cryptocurrencies. Table 4: Binance price history – 2017 to 2024 2017.00 2018.00 2019.00 2020.00 2021.00 2022.00 2023.00 2024.00

International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) E-ISSN: 2582-2160 ● Website: www.ijfmr.com ● Email: editor@ijfmr.com Volume 6, Issue 3, May-June 2024 Figure 4 -Binance coin price history – 2017 to 2024 The table 4 presents the annual price history of Binance Coin (BNB) from 2017 to 2024. Starting at $8.64 in 2017, BNB's value increased modestly to $10.93 in 2018 and $19.63 in 2019. The growth continued in 2020, with the price reaching $22.52. A significant surge occurred in 2021, when BNB's price skyrocketed to $390.12, reflecting the broader cryptocurrency market boom. The subsequent years saw some fluctuations, with the price decreasing to $319.82 in 2022 and further to $271.24 in 2023. However, 2024 marked a remarkable recovery and growth, with the price soaring to $646.72, the highest value in the given period. This data underscores BNB's substantial volatility and overall upward trajectory in the Table 5: US Dollar price history – 2017 to 2024

International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) E-ISSN: 2582-2160 ● Website: www.ijfmr.com ● Email: editor@ijfmr.com Volume 6, Issue 3, May-June 2024 Figure 5 -US Dollar price history – 2017 to 2024 The table 5 presents the annual price history of Binance Coin (BNB) from 2017 to 2024. Starting at $8.64 in 2017, BNB's value increased modestly to $10.93 in 2018 and $19.63 in 2019. The growth continued in 2020, with the price reaching $22.52. A significant surge occurred in 2021, when BNB's price skyrocketed to $390.12, reflecting the broader cryptocurrency market boom. The subsequent years saw some fluctuations, with the price decreasing to $319.82 in 2022 and further to $271.24 in 2023. However, 2024 marked a remarkable recovery and growth, with the price soaring to $646.72, the highest value in the given period. This data underscores BNB's substantial volatility and overall upward trajectory in the The analysis covers the price histories of various cryptocurrencies from 2009 to 2024. Bitcoin showed significant volatility, starting at $0.0041 in 2009 and peaking at $73,750 in 2024. Ethereum's price varied from $756.73 in 2017 to a remarkable $23,608.02 in 2024, with notable fluctuations. Tether, designed as a stable coin, maintained a value around $1 until 2024 when it dropped to $0.50. Binance Coin experienced substantial growth from $8.64 in 2017 to $646.72 in 2024. Lastly, the US Dollar Coin remained stable, with minor deviations around $1, indicating its role as a stable value store. Overall, this study results underscore the varying degrees of volatility and stability within the cryptocur- rency market, highlighting the potential for high returns alongside significant risks. Stablecoins like Tether and US Dollar Coin provide consistency, whereas Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Binance Coin offer high growth potential but with greater price instability. In conclusion, the value of cryptocurrencies is influenced by a complex interplay of market dynamics, adoption and utility, regulatory environments, market sentiment, the role of stablecoins, technological progress, and broader economic factors. Understanding these elements is crucial for predicting future trends and making informed investment decisions in the volatile cryptocurrency market. 1. Sovbetov, Y. (2018). Factors influencing cryptocurrency prices: Evidence from bitcoin, ethereum, dash, litcoin, and monero. Journal of Economics and Financial Analysis, 2(2), 1-27.

International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) E-ISSN: 2582-2160 ● Website: www.ijfmr.com ● Email: editor@ijfmr.com Volume 6, Issue 3, May-June 2024 2. Qureshi, S., Aftab, M., Bouri, E., & Saeed, T. (2020). Dynamic interdependence of cryptocurrency markets: An analysis across time and frequency. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications, 559, 125077. (2023). Fundamental and speculative components of the cryptocurrency pricing dynam- ics. Financial Innovation, 9(1), 61. 3. Kukacka, J., & Kristoufek, L. (2023). Fundamental and speculative components of the cryptocurrency pricing dynamics. Financial Innovation, 9(1), 61. 4. Kyriazis, N. A. (2021). A survey on volatility fluctuations in the decentralized cryptocurrency finan- cial assets. Journal of Risk and Financial Management, 14(7), 293. 5. Kjærland, F., Meland, M., Oust, A., & Øyen, V. (2018). How can bitcoin price fluctuations be ex- 6. Kyriazis, N., Papadamou, S., & Corbet, S. (2020). A systematic review of the bubble dynamics of cryptocurrency prices. Research in International Business and Finance, 54, 101254. 7. Yang, B., Sun, Y., & Wang, S. (2020). A novel two-stage approach for cryptocurrency anZalysis. International Review of Financial Analysis, 72, 101567. 8. Nakamoto, S. (2008). Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. 9. Vigna, P., & Casey, M. J. (2016). The Age of Cryptocurrency: How Bitcoin and Digital Money are Challenging the Global Economic Order. 10. Zohar, A. (2015). Bitcoin: under the hood. Communications of the ACM, 58(9), 104-113. 11. Gandal, N., & Halaburda, H. (2016). Can We Predict the Winner in a Market with Network Effects? Competition in Cryptocurrency Market. Games, 7(3), 16. 12. Buterin, V. (2014). A Next-Generation Smart Contract and Decentralized Application Platform. 13. Wood, G. (2014). Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger. Ethereum Project Yellow Paper, 151(2014), 1-32. 14. Kristoufek, L. (2013). Bitcoin meets Google Trends and Wikipedia: Quantifying the relationship be- tween phenomena of the Internet era. Scientific reports, 3, 3415. 15. Garcia, D., Tessone, C. J., Mavrodiev, P., & Perony, N. (2014). The digital traces of bubbles: feedback cycles between socio-economic signals in the Bitcoin economy. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 16. Cheah, E. T., & Fry, J. (2015). Speculative bubbles in Bitcoin markets? An empirical investigation into the fundamental value of Bitcoin. Economics Letters, 130, 32-36. 17. Bouri, E., Molnár, P., Azzi, G., Roubaud, D., & Hagfors, L. I. (2017). On the hedge and safe haven properties of Bitcoin: Is it really more than a diversifier? Finance Research Letters, 20, 192-198. 18. Catalini, C., & Gans, J. S. (2016). Some Simple Economics of the Blockchain. National Bureau of 19. Easley, D., O'Hara, M., & Basu, S. (2019). From mining to markets: The evolution of bitcoin transac- tion fees. Journal of Financial Economics, 134(1), 91-109. 20. Conti, M., Kumar, S., Lal, C., & Ruj, S. (2018). A survey on security and privacy issues of Bitcoin. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 20(4), 3416-3452. 21. Vasek, M., Thornton, M., & Moore, T. (2014). Empirical analysis of denial-of-service attacks in the Bitcoin ecosystem. International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, 57-71. 22. Nian, L. P., & Chuen, D. L. K. (2015). Introduction to Bitcoin. In Handbook of Digital Currency (pp.

International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR) E-ISSN: 2582-2160 ● Website: www.ijfmr.com ● Email: editor@ijfmr.com Volume 6, Issue 3, May-June 2024 23. Glaser, F., Zimmermann, K., Haferkorn, M., Weber, M. C., & Siering, M. (2014). Bitcoin-asset or currency? Revealing users' hidden intentions. In ECIS (p. 1). 24. Yermack, D. (2015). Is Bitcoin a real currency? An economic appraisal. In Handbook of Digital Cur- rency (pp. 31-43). Academic Press. 25. Narayanan, A., Bonneau, J., Felten, E., Miller, A., & Goldfeder, S. (2016). Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Technologies. Princeton University Press. 26. Cong, L. W., He, Z., & Li, J. (2019). Decentralized mining in centralized pools. The Review of Finan- cial Studies, 32(6), 2183-2225. 27. Bonneau, J., Miller, A., Clark, J., Narayanan, A., Kroll, J. A., & Felten, E. W. (2015). Sok: Research perspectives and challenges for bitcoin and cryptocurrencies. In 2015 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (pp. 104-121). 28. Lee, D. K. C. (2019). Handbook of Blockchain, Digital Finance, and Inclusion, Volume 1. Academic Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License

---NEW PAPER---

Deep Learning for Survival Analysis: A Review Simon Wiegrebe1,3,4, Philipp Kopper2,3, Raphael Sonabend5, Bernd Bischl2,3, and Andreas 1Statistical Consulting Unit StaBLab, Department of Statistics, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany. 2Department of Statistics, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany. 3Munich Center for Machine Learning, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany. 4Department of Genetic Epidemiology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. 5MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Jameel Institute, Imperial College London, School of Public The influx of deep learning (DL) techniques into the field of survival analysis in recent years has led to substantial methodological progress; for instance, learning from unstructured or high-dimensional data such as images, text or omics data. In this work, we conduct a comprehensive systematic review of DL-based methods for time-to-event analysis, characterizing them according to both survival- and DL-related attributes. In summary, the reviewed methods often address only a small subset of tasks relevant to time-to-event data — e.g., single-risk right-censored data — and neglect to incorporate Our findings are summarized in an editable, open-source, interactive table: As this research area is advancing rapidly, we encourage community contribution in order to keep this database up to date. Survival analysis (SA), or equivalently time-to-event analysis, comprises a set of techniques enabling the unbiased estimation of the distribution of outcome variables that are partially censored, truncated, or both. Usually, the outcome is given by the time until the occurrence of an event such as death, system failure, or Non-parametric methods like the Kaplan-Meier estimator (Kaplan et al., 1958) are baseline tools still used today, yet semi-parametric methods received the most attention historically, in particular the Cox proportional hazards regression model (Cox, 1972) and its extensions. Since the early 2000s, Machine Learning (ML) methods have been successfully adapted to survival tasks: e.g., Random Survival Forest (Ishwaran et al., 2008) and boosting-based methods (Binder et al., 2008). These methods often outperform traditional statistical models in terms of predictive power (Steele et al., 2018) (see Wang et al. (2019b) and Sonabend (2021) for detailed discussions). Neural networks (NNs) had already been applied to survival tasks in the 1990s (Faraggi et al., 1995; Brown et al., 1997), but were shallow and restricted to the most standard survival settings. Most modern Deep Learning (DL) survival models have been developed only since the late 2010s, as indicated by the publication year of the methods we review; see Main Table (https://survival-org.github.io/DL4Survival). Despite the large number of DL-based survival methods proposed in recent years, to the best of our knowledge, there is no general systematic review of these methods. Schwarzer et al. (2000) summarize misuses in early applications of NNs to clinical data. Lee et al. (2019b) and Deepa et al. (2022) do not explicitly focus on DL-based survival methods, do not address any survival-related specifics of DL, and are restricted to use cases involving genomics data and cancer survival prediction, respectively. The glioma- focused survey by Wijethilake et al. (2021) as well as the benchmarking study by Zhang et al. (2022) consider only few NN-based methods and thus do not provide a general overview of DL methods for time-to-event arXiv:2305.14961v4 [stat.ML] 22 Feb 2024

Motivated by the above, in this paper we provide a comprehensive review of currently available DL-based survival methods, addressing theoretical dimensions, such as model class and NN architecture, as well as data-related aspects, such as outcome types and feature-related aspects (see Section 3 for definitions). Table 1 gives an overview of the dimensions we consider. PEM-, ODE-, or continuous-time ranking- FFNN, CNN, RNN, AE, Sections 3.2 and 3.3.2 interval-, right- and left-censoring, CR, MSM, recurrent events Sections 2.2.1 and 3.4.1 Sections 2.2.2 and 3.4.2 Table 1: Overview of theoretical and practical dimensions reviewed. PEM: Piecewise Exponential Model; ODE: Ordinary Differential Equation; FFNN: Feed-forward Neural Network; CNN: Convolutional Neural Network; RNN: Recurrent Neural Network; AE: Autoencoder; nODE: neural ODE; CR: Competing Risks; MSM: Multi-state ; TVF: Time-varying Features; TVE: Time-varying This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces SA notation and concepts (Section 2.1), common data-related aspects of survival tasks (Section 2.2), as well as estimation of survival models (Section 2.3). Section 3 outlines the review methodology (Section 3.1), explains general NN architecture choices in SA (Section 3.2), and eventually provides a detailed, comprehensive overview of all methods reviewed, covering estimation and network architecture (Section 3.3), and supported survival tasks in terms of outcome types and feature-related aspects (Section 3.4) ; findings are summarized in the Main Table. Finally, Section 4 concludes, discusses limitations, and provides an outlook. Theoretical Concepts and Data-related Aspects In this section, we first introduce quantities that are targets of estimation in SA and characterize the distribution of a random variable T > 0. Later, we describe censoring and truncation, which need to be accounted for in order to estimate these quantities (see Section 2.2). Initially, assume that T is continuous. Let fT (t) and FT (t) := P(T ≤t) be its density and cumulative distribution function, respectively. Then, the survival function of T is defined as ST (t) := P(T > t) = 1 −FT (t), i.e., the probability of surviving beyond t. The hazard rate, hT (t) := lim ∆tP(t ≤T < t + ∆t|T ≥t) = fT (t) is the instantaneous risk of the event occurring given it has not yet occurred at time t. Finally, the cumulative hT (u)du = −log(ST (t)),

is often used as an intermediate step when calculating the survival probability. In the above, T was assumed to be continuous. However, sometimes the time scale is discrete by nature (e.g., grade level at the time of school dropout) or a continuous time scale is discretized into intervals. With discrete event times, the discrete hazard hT (t) := P(T = t|T ≥t), t = 1, 2, . . . is the probability of the event occurring in the time interval t conditional upon the individual still being alive at the beginning of t (cf. Tutz et al. (2016) for details). This gives rise to the discrete-time survival probability ST (t) := P(T > t) = Qt j=1(1 −hT (j)). Some discrete time methods on the other hand directly estimate the probability mass function (PMF), i.e. P(T = t), rather than estimating the discrete hazard We now discuss different data-related aspects of time-to-event data, in terms of both outcomes and features, that are frequently encountered in real-world survival tasks. We refer to them as outcome types (Section 2.2.1) and feature-related aspects (Section 2.2.2), respectively. In Section 3.4, we provide detailed information regarding which of the reviewed methods can handle these Throughout this work, we consider a sample of size n and refer to a single i ∈{1, . . . , n} as individual or subject. Let Ti > 0 be the non-negative random variable representing the time until the event of interest for subject i occurs. We want to estimate the distribution of Ti given the p-dimensional feature vector xi. However, Ti often cannot be fully observed because the time-to-event is right-, left- or interval-censored. i be the left- and right-censoring times, and let Li and Ri be the endpoints of the censoring interval for subject i, respectively. For an interval-censored observation, we have Ti ∈(Li, Ri] as we only know that the event occurs within the interval, but not the exact time. Right-censoring Ti ∈(Li = CR and left-censoring Ti ∈(Li = 0, Ri = CL i ] are special cases of interval-censoring. Time-to-event data can also be subject to truncation. In SA, truncation implies that subjects are either not part of the dataset at all or not part of the risk set for a specific event at certain time points. Formally, be the left- and right-truncation times, respectively. Left-truncation occurs when T R then subjects with Ti < T L i never enter the study. Similarly, observations are right-truncated when T L and Ti > T R Survival tasks are not restricted to single-risk scenarios. In case of competing risks, each individual can experience only one of at least two distinct, mutually exclusive events, e.g., death in hospital versus hospital discharge. More generally, in a multi-state setting multiple (transient and terminal) events (states) are possible, as well as certain (recurring) transitions between them, e.g., transitions between different stages of an illness with death as terminal event. We denote transitions by k ∈{1, . . . , K} and episodes by e = 1, . . . , E. A final outcome type we consider is recurrent events. Often, we record a single outcome (censoring or event) for each individual. However, when conditions such as epilepsy or sports injuries are being modeled, subjects may experience the same event type repeatedly. Table 2 provides an overview and examples of the outcome types discussed in this section. Time-varying features (TVFs) such as weight or lifestyle factors change over time, whereas others such as sex are time-constant. Similarly, time-varying effects (TVEs) are feature effects on the outcome (e.g., on the hazard rate) that vary over time. Both TVFs and TVEs constitute deviations from the proportional hazards (PH) assumption (see Section 2.3). Another important feature-related aspect is the dimensionality of data input. Due to the prominence of SA in the life sciences, features derived from high-dimensional data — omics data in particular — are

clinical trials: exact event times are unobserved for some individuals because of age at which children learn a certain task: some children already know the task at the beginning of the study, but it is unknown at which age they learned it medical study with a periodic follow-up: exact event times are unknown, only the interval between two follow-ups is known transfusion-induced AIDS onset study (Klein et al., 1997): only patients develop- ing AIDS from transfusion before the registry sampling date are included, while patients with onset after that date are right-truncated coumarin abortion study (Meister et al., 2008): only women conscious of their pregnancy are included; women who had a spontaneous abortion before their pregnancy is recognized never enter the study study on dialysis mortality (Noordzij et al., 2013): the event of interest, death on dialysis, is precluded by the competing event kidney transplantation study on kidney failure: for all patients, transitions between the states healthy, dialysis, kidney transplantation and death are possible, sometimes even bidirec- tionally (e.g., between dialysis and kidney transplantation) incidence of pneumonia in young children (Ramjith et al., 2021): the occurrence of multiple, recurrent pneumonia episodes is possible, with episodes within a child’s history not being independent Table 2: Overview of different outcome types. sometimes employed to predict and explain survival times. In order for a method to learn from a high- dimensional feature space, the model architecture needs to be adapted, usually with appropriate penalization or feature selection techniques (see, e.g., Wu et al., 2019). Multimodality is the final feature-related aspect we consider. In the life sciences, in particular, we are oftentimes not restricted to structured tabular data (e.g., clinical patient data), but also have access to unstructured data, such as images (e.g., CT scans) or text data (e.g., written doctor’s notes); that is, the feature set is multimodal and special techniques are required to extract information from it. Here we summarize estimation in the SA context, focusing on the methods most frequently used among the DL-based approaches included in this review. In SA we want to estimate the distribution of event times based on observed data, represented by tuples i,k,e defining entry and exit times of subject i = 1, . . . , n into the risk set for transition k ∈{1, . . . , K} in episode e = 1, . . . E, respectively, and δi,k,e ∈{0, 1} being the indicator for whether the respective transition has been actually observed (rather than censored). Finally xi,k,e represents the p-dimensional feature vector (for simplicity we omit that xi,k,e could additionally vary over time between the entry and exit times for transition k in episode e). Often this notation can be simplified. For example, when all subjects enter the risk set at time point 0 and there is no truncation or interval-censoring, yentry is omitted. When we only consider one single event type, we can drop index k. If there are no recurrent transitions, we can additionally drop e, yielding the more common notation (yi, δi, xi). Parametric survival models, such as the Accelerated Failure Time (AFT) model (Kalbfleisch et al., 2011), assume event times to follow a certain statistical distribution characterized by a set of parameters. Based on the distribution-specific likelihood, parametric survival models then estimate these distributional parameters as a function of features x. We can write the density for an event at time t as

θ = θ(x) = (θ1(x), θ2(x), . . .) = (g1(x, β1), g2(x, β2), . . .), where g1(), g2(), . . . are real-valued functions associating features x with the distributional parameters θ(x) via parameters β1, β2, . . . . That is, all distributional parameters (e.g., both shape and scale of a Weibull distribution) can be estimated as a function of x. Estimation proceeds by maximizing the likelihood given (1 −S(yl)) × · · · , where Li are the individual likelihood contributions, depending on the observed outcome type, and O, C, L are the sets of observed event times, right-censored, and left-censored observations, respectively. Likelihood contributions for other outcome types can be constructed similarly (e.g., Klein et al., 1997, Ch. 3.5). Other methods exploit the relationships f(t) = h(t)S(t) and S(t) = exp , such that the likelihood can always be expressed in terms of only the hazard rate (1), and right-censoring and left-truncation are dealt with by adjusting the so-called risk set , δi, xi) : yentry Most prominently, the Cox PH regression (Cox, 1972) models the hazard rate at time t, conditional on features x, as the product of a non-parametrically estimated baseline hazard h0(t) and the exponentiated log-risk η = g(x, β): h(t|x) = h0(t) exp(η = g(x, β)). Feature effects are multiplicative with respect to the hazard rate independently of time, yielding proportion- Parameters are estimated by optimizing the log-partial-likelihood where t(m) is the mth ordered event (m ∈{1, . . . , M}), R(t(m)) denotes the risk set at that time point, and x(m) is the feature vector of the individual experiencing the event at t(m). Piecewise Exponential Models (PEMs) also parametrize the hazard rate as in (6). However, by parti- tioning the time axis into J intervals and assuming piecewise constant hazards within each interval, the baseline hazard is parametrized and estimated alongside the feature-related coefficients. Friedman (1982) showed that the likelihood of this model is proportional to a Poisson likelihood, which implies that, after appropriate data transformation, any method capable of minimizing a negative Poisson log-likelihood can also be used for various survival tasks (Bender et al., 2021). Despite partitioning the follow-up into intervals, PEM-based approaches are methods for continuous time-to-event data as they take the full information about event times into account. Discrete-time survival methods, such as discrete hazard methods (Tutz et al., 2016) or Multi-Task Logistic Regression (MTLR; Yu et al., 2011), consider the time-to-event data to be a succession of binary outcomes. To do so, the time axis is first partitioned into intervals, with T = t implying the event occurred in interval (at−1, at]. Binary event indicators yit are then defined for each time interval t and used as outcomes. For individual i, the discrete hazard hi(t|xi) in interval t is then hi(t|xi) = ϕ(g(x, β)) = P(yit = 1|T ≥t, xi),

where the real-valued function g() represents feature effects and ϕ() maps this quantity onto [0, 1] to yield the conditional event probability P(yit = 1|T ≥t, xi). Analogously to PEM-based approaches, any ML algorithm that is applicable to binary outcomes can be used for discrete-time survival modeling after data transformation. The logit model, for instance, uses a logistic response function to model the probability of the event taking place in t (i.e., the discrete hazard (2)), conditional on at−1 < t and feature values x. Alternatively, some discrete-time methods directly estimate the probability of an event at specified time points P(yit = 1|T = t, xi) using a softmax output layer. Deep Learning in Survival Analysis Early DL-based survival techniques date back to the mid-1990s (Liestbl et al., 1994; Faraggi et al., 1995; Brown et al., 1997) and are usually NN-based extensions of classical statistical survival methods discussed in Section 2.3. While in the Cox model the log-risk (6) is traditionally given by g(x, β) = x⊤β, the model by Faraggi et al. (1995) replaces the linear predictor by a shallow feed-forward neural network (FFNN). Liestbl et al. (1994) propose implementing the PEM as an NN, yet without any hidden layers. The PEANN model by Fornili et al. (2013) parametrizes the piecewise constant hazards by a shallow FFNN. PLANN (Biganzoli et al., 1998) is an NN-based extension of the discrete-time logit model, parametrizing the discrete hazard by Many DL-based methods for SA have been developed in recent years. They usually build upon one of the aforementioned statistical survival approaches, while harnessing advantages of NNs. Furthermore, recent advances in multimodal learning and interpretability have made DL-based survival methods even more attractive for many common survival tasks. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria For this review, we designed a two-step literature screening process. In the first step (inclusion criteria), we searched Web of Science for the topic ("survival analysis" or "time-to-event analysis" or "survival data" or ("neural network" or "deep learning") AND ("model" or "method") AND ("performance" or "evaluation" or "comparison" or "benchmark") with December 31, 2022 as cutoff date. These inclusion criteria resulted in a total of 211 articles. In the second step (exclusion criteria), we excluded all articles not satisfying all of the following four conditions: (a) Development of a new DL-based method beyond the mere application of an already existing method to new data or contexts. (b) Evaluation of performance results on at least one non-private benchmark dataset. (c) Performance evaluation using metrics designed for time-to-event data, such as C-index or Integrated (d) Focus on estimation and prediction in the context of time-to-event data and learning all model param- eters within the NN architecture in an end-to-end fashion. Criteria (a), (b), and (c) aim to ensure that the paper in question develops a new method rather than applying a known method to new data or in a new context. Criterion (b) complements (a) as the predictive utility is often illustrated via benchmark experiments when new methods are proposed. Additionally, criterion (b) introduces an open science aspect and ensures that at least one empirical comparison could be replicated in theory. Criterion (c) ensures that benchmark analyses focus on methods modeling time-to-event data, as some papers that passed the initial screening eventually ignored the time-to-event nature of the data. Finally, criterion (d) aims to exclude two-step approaches where DL is used solely for feature extraction,

with survival modeling performed using non-DL approaches with the extracted features outside of the NN. Our criteria are motivated by the scope of this work — to review methods that can be used for specific time-to-event problems and to provide details on estimation-, architecture- and data-related aspects of the Subsequently, we combined the selected articles with additional papers that had otherwise come to our attention and fulfilled the above criteria, yielding a total of 61 articles — and thus, 61 distinct methods. The inclusion, exclusion, and screening process is visualized in the PRISMA diagram in Figure 1. Figure 1: PRISMA diagram for literature screening of deep learning-based survival methods. The following naming scheme is used in the remainder of the paper to reference individual meth- ods/papers: the method name as specified in the publication, if provided and unique; if the method name is not unique, we append a suffix (the first three letters of the first author’s last name followed by the year of publication) with an underscore; if no method name is provided, we use this suffix as a name. All methods are summarized in our Main Table (https://survival-org.github.io/DL4Survival). We now aim to provide a summary of the 61 methods based on a broad range of both theoretical (estimation and architecture) as well as practical model characteristics (outcome types and feature-related FFNNs were the earliest type of NN architecture (Ivakhnenko et al., 1967; Rosenblatt, 1967). Within an FFNN, information passes from the input nodes through a user-specified number of hidden layers until the

output nodes. Information only flows forward as there are no cyclical patterns or loops. The main property of FFNNs is stated through the universal approximation theorem (Hornik et al. (1989)), meaning that NNs are capable of approximating a very general class of functions. Practically, this allows FFNN to discover non-linear feature effects and complex interaction structures. In SA, FFNNs naturally allow for a more flexible estimation of, e.g., (semi-)parametric hazard rates, as well as for the incorporation of TVEs and TVFs (in theory); for instance, the hazard rate in (6) can be estimated more flexibly by parametrizing g(x) through an NN. At the same time, the FFNN architecture contains multiple limitations: for example, learning from multimodal data input — in particular, image data — is not possible. FFNNs constitute the main architecture of most early DL-based survival methods and still serve as a baseline building-block within Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) were introduced in the late 1980s (LeCun et al., 1989) and are most successfully employed in computer vision. In time-to-event analysis, CNNs are usually applied to unstructured data, especially images. Often, CNN-based methods use large pre-trained CNNs with many parameters, such as ResNet18 (He et al., 2016), and then fine-tune them on case-specific data. This transfer learning approach enables the application of large CNNs to smaller datasets. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs), also invented in the 1980s (Rumelhart et al., 1986), distinguish themselves from FFNNs and CNNs by being able to memorize parts of the input through a short-term memory and are thus applicable to sequential data. In SA, RNNs are hence useful when TVFs are present or to take temporal information into account in general. The autoencoder (AE; Ballard, 1987) is another common NN architecture, learning how to reduce the dimensionality of input data and subsequently reconstructing the data from the learned latent representation; extensions include stacked AEs (SAEs; Vincent et al., 2010) and variational AEs (VAEs; Kingma et al., 2014). General Adversarial Networks (GANs; Goodfellow et al., 2014) consist of a generator that produces synthetic data of gradually improving quality as well as a discriminator that learns how to distinguish between true data input and generator-produced data points. Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) use an attention mechanism to learn a representation of context in sequential (e.g., language) data and can subsequently produce output (sequences) from it. Normalizing flows (NFs; Rezende et al., 2015) constitute a family of generative models which employ differentiable and invertible mappings to obtain complex distributions from a simple initial probability distribution for which sampling and density evaluation is easy. Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (nODEs; Chen et al., 2018) use NNs to parametrize the derivative of the hidden state, thus moving beyond the standard specification of a discrete sequence of hidden layers. Fuzzy neural networks (Lee et al., 1975) use fuzzy numbers as inputs and weights within the NN. Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015) employ a Markov chain to gradually add random noise to the input data and subsequently learn to undo this diffusion, learning to generate new data from noise. Many adoptions of NNs for SA emphasize the replacement of the predictors in (4), (6), or (8) through a (deep) NN. The (DL-based) survival models can be further extended to also include interactions, non-linear effects, stratification, time-varying effects, and even unstructured components d(z), yielding the generalized η = g(x, z, t) = f(x, t) + γ1d1(z1) + · · · + γGdG(zG), where f(x, t) denotes potentially non-linear, time-varying effects of tabular features x as well as their interactions. dg(zg) denotes embeddings learned in the deep part(s) of the model from unstructured data sources zg, g ∈{1, . . . , G}, such as images or text. That is, the predictor g(x) from (7) can be generalized to be g(x, z, t). Using an appropriate transformation function ψ predictor (9) can be transformed to e.g. the hazard function or cumulative incidence function, depending on the target of estimation. Architectural choice is also closely related to parametrization. The PMF of discrete-time methods can be modeled via a softmax layer producing discrete survival probabilities at each (pre-defined) time point, as done in Lee et al. (2018). RNN architectures are particularly suitable for taking into account temporal information and sharing parameters across time, e.g., in order to estimate quantities like the hazard rate or survival probability at time t using information from time points ˜t < t (e.g., Giunchiglia et al., 2018). Some less frequently encountered architectures, for example GANs, incentivize the development of custom losses (Chapfuwa et al., 2018). More recent work shows that (surrogate) loss functions can be created based on scoring rules, such as a smooth C-index loss function (Huang et al., 2018) or Survival-CRPS (Avati

et al., 2020), for parameter estimation without requiring traditional inner loss functions like the negative It is furthermore possible to directly integrate some time-to-event data modalities into the architecture of deep survival models. For example, shared and cause-specific subnetworks for cause- or transition-specific hazards in competing risks and multi-state modeling analysis via soft- or hard-sharing of parameters (Ruder, 2017) have been adopted by many DL-based survival methods when modeling transitions between different states (cf. Figure 2). Figure 2: Schematic neural architecture for competing risks in survival analysis using shared and cause- specific subnetworks. ψ() transforms the model output (e.g., hazard rate) to the final outcome (e.g., cumu- lative incidence functions (CIFs)). Additionally, many methods have shown how to integrate multimodal data, by using a separate subnet- work for each modality. For instance, one may use a CNN-based subnetwork for image data while tabular data is modeled with an FFNN. The different modalities can be fused together in different ways in the network head. If interaction between different modalities is desired, vector representations of the data are concatenated and fed through another joint FFNN. Otherwise, separate scalars are learned and added onto each other. We illustrate two common architectures that tackle competing risks and multiple data modalities — and can also be combined — in Figures 2 and 3.

Figure 3: Schematic neural architecture for multimodal data input in survival analysis using separate subnet- works for all modalities. Their outputs are reshaped and concatenated to align dimensions. ψ() transforms the model output to the final outcome. The X-ray scan is obtained from Irvin et al. (2019). Estimation and Network Architecture We now review all 61 DL-based survival methods based on theoretical and technical aspects. In Section 3.3.1, we aim to categorize the methods in terms of estimation-related concepts — model class, loss functions, and parametrization — and how these concepts correlate. In Section 3.3.2, we address the NN architecture choices of all methods reviewed. We classify DL-based survival methods in terms of three concepts related to model estimation. First, the model class (cf. Figure 4) describes which type of statistical survival technique forms the basis of the DL method — usually one of the approaches introduced in Section 3.3.1. Second, the loss function is often a direct consequence of the model class (i.e., its negative log-likelihood). However, as is common in DL, some methods employ multiple losses for improved performance or multi-task learning. For instance, some DL-based survival methods compute a ranking loss, in addition to a standard survival loss, for improvement of the C-index performance measure. The final loss is usually computed as the (weighted) average of all

losses applied. Third, the parametrization determines which model component is being parametrized by an NN. The standard model parametrization is usually implied by the model class. Figure 4: Absolute frequencies of model classes among all 61 methods reviewed. Almost all modern DL-based survival methods are optimized with gradient-based methods, featuring tractable loss functions yet with many parameters to be optimized. Optimizing the loss function in a batch- wise manner, which is the common approach in DL, is not always feasible, though. This holds for Cox-based methods because the partial loss (7) depends on the complete risk set. Recently, Kvamme et al. (2019a) showed that Cox-based methods can be optimized with stochastic gradient descent methods (i.e., batch-wise) if the batch size is sufficiently large to non-parametrically approximate the risk set. Before that, deep Cox- based methods were optimized with full gradient descent, making them less attractive for computationally We now give a detailed description of the above estimation-related concepts as well as their interrelation for all methods reviewed. Out of the 61 methods included in this review, 26 methods are Cox-based; that is, these methods are essentially DL-based modifications and extensions of the Cox regression model. This is underlined by the fact that all of them parametrize the hazard rate — more precisely, the log-risk function g(x) in (6) — by an NN and minimize the (sometimes slightly modified) Cox loss, i.e., the (negative logarithm of the) partial likelihood of the Cox model.

DeepSurv by Katzman et al. (2018) extends Faraggi et al. (1995) by using a deep FFNN as well as different non-linear hidden layer activation functions. The model by Faraggi et al. (1995) is a simple special case of DeepSurv, with a single hidden layer with logistic activation and identity output activation. Note that the PH assumption induced by the Cox PH regression model is maintained in DeepSurv, as g(x) remains time-constant despite being parametrized by a (deep) NN. DeepSurv uses stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for optimization. To do so, DeepSurv uses a restricted risk set including only individuals in the current batch since the Cox loss originally sums over the entire risk set, which would impede batching. Cox-Time (Kvamme et al., 2019b) is a more flexible extension of DeepSurv where a time-dependent predictor allows estimation of TVEs, i.e. h(t|x) = h0(t) exp(g(x, t)). However, this increased flexibility would render the batching strategy as applied by DeepSurv (and most other PH-restricted Cox-based methods) computationally expensive. Therefore, the Cox-Time loss function is modified to approximate the risk set by a sufficiently large subset of all individuals at risk, which enables mini-batching and thus scalability to large datasets. NN-DeepSurv (Tong et al., 2022) is another extension of DeepSurv, employing a nuclear norm for imputation of missing More than half of all Cox-based methods (14) focus on the applicability to high-dimensional data, usually omics data. MCAP (Chai et al., 2022) and VAECox (Kim et al., 2020) both use multiple losses, the latter one within a transfer learning approach. Cox-nnet (Ching et al., 2018), Cox-PASNet (Hao et al., 2018) and its multimodal extension PAGE-Net (Hao et al., 2019), GDP (Xie et al., 2019), DNNSurv Sun2020 (Sun et al., 2020), Qiu2020 (Qiu et al., 2020), DeepOmix (Zhao et al., 2021), and CNT (Fan et al., 2022) use simple FFNNs and only a single Cox loss, thus being very similar to DeepSurv and Cox-Time. SALMON (Huang et al., 2019) and CNN-Cox (Yin et al., 2022) distinguish themselves through their architecture (see Section 3.3.2), Haa2019 (Haarburger et al., 2019) and ConcatAE/CrossAE (Tong et al., 2020) through additionally being multimodal (see below). Eight Cox-based methods focus on unstructured or multimodal input (see also Section 3.4.2). Wide- AndDeep (P¨olsterl et al., 2020) combines a linear predictor of tabular features (wide part) with a 1D em- bedding d(z) learned from a point cloud, which is a latent representation learned from 3D shapes (deep part); subsequently both parts are fused by linearly aggregating the learned weights as in (9). The model uses the DeepSurv loss and thus preserves the PH assumption. Haa2019 employs a pre-trained CNN of type ResNet18 for subsequent fine-tuning on CT scans, using a Cox loss. Both DeepConvSurv (Zhu et al., 2016) and CapSurv (Tang et al., 2019) can learn from image data — yet without incorporating structured (tabular) data — by using CNN and CapsNet architectures (see Section 3.3.2), respectively. vSurv uses a single Cox loss, while CapSurv additionally employs the CapsNet margin and reconstruction losses. Both ConcatAE/CrossAE and PAGE-Net can process high-dimensional data as well as multimodal data; ConcatAE/CrossAE use classification and reconstruction losses in addition to the Cox loss to do so, while PAGE-Net introduces biologically interpretable pathology, genome-, and a demography-specific layers. Xie2021 (Xie et al., 2021) can learn from unstructured data for cure rate classification. DAFT (Wolf et al., 2022) employs CNNs and a single Cox loss to learn from both structured and unstructured data. SurvNet (Wang et al., 2021) and DCM (Nagpal et al., 2021a) do not accommodate any of the additional outcome types or feature-related aspects defined above (see also Section 3.4), yet they use multiple losses. In addition to a Cox regression module, SurvNet employs an input construction module and a survival classification module (with corresponding losses) for handling missing values and high- versus low-risk profile classification, respectively. DCM employs an approximate Monte Carlo Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm for the estimation of a mixture of Cox models, the total loss also including an Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) component. ELMCoxBAR (Wang et al., 2019a) and San2020 (Sansaengtham et al., 2020) are standard Cox-based methods in terms of estimation, their architectures being extensions of FFNNs (see Another 19 methods can be categorized as discrete-time approaches. They consider time to be discrete and usually employ classification techniques, with the outcome being binary event indicators for each discrete time point or interval. The standard loss function of discrete-time DL-based survival methods is the neg- ative log-likelihood (NLL), while typically the discrete hazard (2) is parametrized by an NN — just like in the early PLANN model. However, as compared to the Cox-based methods which are rather homoge- neous methodologically, discrete-time methods are much more heterogeneous in terms of loss functions and

DeepHit (Lee et al., 2018) is a discrete-time DL-based survival method. It aims to learn first-hitting times directly by not making any assumptions about the underlying stochastic process and parametrizing the discrete PMF directly. DeepHit combines two loss functions: first, the log-likelihood derived from the joint distribution of first hitting time and the corresponding event, adjusted for right-censoring and taking into account competing risks; and second, a combination of ranking losses. Dynamic-DeepHit (Lee et al., 2019a), an RNN-based extension of DeepHit which can handle longitudinal input data and thus TVFs, additionally employs a so-called prediction loss for the auxiliary task of step-ahead prediction of TVFs. The transformer-based TransformerJM (Lin et al., 2022) also parametrizes the PMF, focusing on modeling survival data and longitudinal data jointly and training on a combination of NLL- and MSE-based losses. RNN-SURV (Giunchiglia et al., 2018) uses both features and time as inputs, and outputs the survival probability at each discrete time point, employing RNN architecture to use information from previous time points to inform prediction of subsequent time points; the model combines the estimated survival probabilities to a risk score via a weighted sum and employs both an NLL loss (based on the survival probabilities) and a C-index-based (ranking) loss (based on the risk score) for model training. Nnet-survival (Gensheimer et al., 2019) parametrizes the discrete hazard (8) by an NN, using an NLL loss as well as mini-batch SGD for rapid convergence and scalability to large datasets. Mini-batch SGD is easily applicable to discrete-time methods because the loss only depends on individuals in the current mini-batch. The specific architecture — in particular, the number of neurons per hidden layer and the connectedness of layers — determines whether TVEs can be modeled or whether the PH restriction is upheld. Another four methods — CNN-Survival (Zhang et al., 2020), MultiSurv (Vale-Silva et al., 2021), SurvCNN (Kalakoti et al., 2021), and Tho2022 (Thorsen-Meyer et al., 2022) — use the same loss and parametrization as Nnet-survival. CNN-Survival uses a CNN along with transfer learning to learn from CT data (without incorporating tabular data). The multimodal MultiSurv first extracts feature representations for each data modality separately, then fuses them, and finally outputs predictions of conditional survival probabilities. SurvCNN creates an image representation of multiple omics data types using CNNs and can combine this with clinical data for prediction. Tho2022 can embed data from multiple modalities, such as electronic health records, and feeds these embedded representations into an RNN which in turn produces survival predictions. The competing-risk and recurrent-event method CRESA (Gupta et al., 2019) is an RNN-based approach that parametrizes the discrete hazard and uses a loss based on recurrent cumulative incidence functions, which also contains a ranking component as in DeepHit. DRSA (Ren et al., 2019) also employs an RNN and also parametrizes the discrete hazard, yet as compared to CRESA it uses multiple log-likelihood-based losses to predict the likelihood of uncensored events as well as survival rates for censored cases. Kam2021 (Kamran et al., 2021) uses the same network architecture as DRSA, but proposes a novel training scheme to directly estimate the survival probability: a combination of Rank Probability Score (RPS) loss, emphasizing calibration, and a kernel loss, emphasizing discrimination through penalization of wrongly ordered uncensored individuals. DCS (Fuhlert et al., 2022) extends the architecture from DRSA and then produces survival probability estimates by employing the same loss function from Kam2021, yet modifying the kernel loss component by not only comparing uncensored-uncensored pairs. N-MTLR (Fotso, 2018) builds upon MTLR and parametrizes the corresponding logistic regression pa- rameters. DNNSurv Zha2019 (Zhao et al., 2019) first computes individual-level pseudo (conditional) prob- abilities, defined as the difference between the estimated survival function with and without individual i and computed on a regular grid of time points, thus reducing the survival task to a regression task, and consequently uses a standard regression loss. su-DeepBTS (Lee et al., 2020) discretizes the time axis but then uses a Cox loss for each time interval, summing up the losses across intervals. DeepComp (Li et al., 2020) combines distinct losses for censored and uncensored observations with an additional penalty. SSMTL (Chi et al., 2021) transforms the survival task into a multi-task setting with binary outcome for all time points (or multi-class in case of competing risks), then predicting survival probabilities for each of the time points. SSMTL also employs a custom loss made up of a classification loss for uncensored data, a so-called semi-supervised loss for censored data, regularization losses (L1 and L2) as well as a ranking loss in order to ensure monotonicity of predicted survival probabilities. Hu2021 (Hu et al., 2021), a transformer-based method, uses an entropy-based loss as well as a discordant- pair penalization loss, parametrizing the discrete hazard. SurvTRACE (Wang et al., 2022), another transformer- based method, also parametrizes the discrete hazard, but additionally performs two auxiliary tasks on the

survival data: classification and regression; accordingly, the final model loss is a combination of a PC-Hazard survival loss (see below), an entropy-based classification loss, as well as a Mean Squared Error (MSE)-based The two methods DeepWeiSurv (Bennis et al., 2020) and DPWTE (Bennis et al., 2021) — the latter one building on the former — are Weibull-based deep survival methods. Neither of them addresses any of the outcome types or feature-related aspects presented in Section 2.2. DeepWeiSurv parametrizes a mixture of Weibull models, as well as both Weibull distribution parameters (see (4) with θ1, θ2 the scale and shape parameters of the Weibull distribution), by an FFNN and uses an NLL-based loss function. DPWTE employs classification and regression subnetworks to learn an optimal mixture of Weibull distributions, using the same loss function as DeepWeiSurv with additional sparsity regularization with respect to the number of mixtures. Ava2020 (Avati et al., 2020) parametrizes the parameters of a log-normal distribution, while being flexible in terms of model architecture. The method introduces the Survival-CRPS loss, a survival adaptation of the Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS). This loss results in well-calibrated survival probabilities and furthermore provides the flexibility to handle both right- and interval-censored data. DSM (Nagpal et al., 2021b) is a hierarchical generative model based on a finite mixture of parametric primitive distributions similar to the well-known approach by Ranganath et al. (2016), using a (mixture) likelihood-based loss as well as an additive loss based on ELBO for uncensored and censored observations; the choice of the parametric survival distribution — either Weibull or Log-Normal — is a hyperparameter and can thus be tuned. Its RNN-based extension RDSM (Nagpal et al., 2021c), is furthermore capable of handling TVFs. Three methods rely on the PEM framework to develop a deep survival approach. PC-Hazard (Kvamme et al., 2021) addresses the right-censored single-risk survival task by parametrizing the hazard rate through an FFNN and using the standard likelihood-based PEM loss. Support for other outcome types or feature- related aspects, as introduced in Sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2, is not discussed. Similarly, DeepPAMM (Kopper et al., 2021; Kopper et al., 2022) uses a penalized Poisson NLL as a loss function and also parametrizes the hazard rate by an NN. This method combines a Piecewise Exponential Additive Mixed Model (PAMM; Bender et al., 2018) with Semi-structured Deep Distributional Regression (R¨ugamer et al., 2023), which embeds the structured predictor in an NN and further learns from other (unstructured) data types (see (9)). Finally, IDNetwork (Cottin et al., 2022) implements an illness-death model, which uses a PEM-based approach to estimate probabilities for transitions between different states and utilizes FFNNs with shared and transition-specific subnetworks. IDNetwork then uses a penalized NLL loss based on the transition DeepCompete (Aastha et al., 2021) consists of an FFNN shared across all risks as well as an FFNN and a neural ordinary differential equation (ODE) block for each specific risk, using an NLL-based loss. survNODE (Groha et al., 2021) is based on a Markov process and aims to directly solve the Kolmogorov forward equations by using neural ODEs to achieve flexible multi-state survival modeling, with the transition rates parametrized by a nODE architecture (see Sections 3.2 and 3.3.2). As can be seen in the section above, multiple discrete-time methods (DeepHit, CRESA, DCS, Kam2021, RNN-Surv, SSCNN, and SSMTL) use ranking losses as auxiliary losses. Beyond that, there are two continuous-time methods — RankDeepSurv and SSCNN — that are built upon ranking losses. Here, we refer to these continuous-time ranking loss-based methods simply as ranking-based methods. RankDeepSurv (Jing et al., 2019) combines ranking losses with an extended MSE loss to augment the number of training samples, without advanced NN architecture or handling of non-standard survival data modalities. SSCNN (Agarwal et al., 2021b) is a multimodal method that reduces histopathology images to whole slide feature maps and uses them, in addition to clinical features, as input of a Siamese Survival CNN; model training with a custom loss — a combination of a ranking loss with a loss to improve model convergence and pairwise differentiation between survival predictions — is built directly on the outputs of the Siamese NN.

As for the remaining five methods, DASA (Nezhad et al., 2019) is a framework introducing a novel sampling strategy based on DL and active learning. The GAN-based DATE (Chapfuwa et al., 2018) seeks to learn the event time distribution non-parametrically by using adversarial learning and a custom loss function made up of an uncensored-data component, a censored-data component, as well as a distortion loss component. Hua2018 (Huang et al., 2018) uses a CNN architecture and correlational layers for multimodal learning to produce person-specific risks, which are then directly fed into a smooth C-index loss function for model training. Aus2021 (Ausset et al., 2021) employs normalizing flows in order to estimate the density of time- to-event data and predict individual survival curves via a transformation model, using an NLL-based loss augmented by an intermediary loss for regularization. Finally, rcICQRNN (Qin et al., 2022) is a deep survival method based on a quantile regression NN, parametrizing the quantile regression coefficients by means of an FFNN and using an inverse-probability-of-censoring weighted log-linear quantile regression loss. Most DL-based survival methods in this review use FFNNs, often in combination with some other, more advanced architecture. Still, 20 methods — as well as all early DL-based methods such as the one by Faraggi et al. (1995) — exclusively rely on FFNNs. Still, architectural choices among these FFNN-based methods differ. For instance, DeepHit uses a softmax outcome layer to produce survival probabilities for each discrete time point and, thus, to model the PMF. Out of a total of 10 CNN-based methods in this review, eight are multimodal methods that can work with image data: DeepConvSurv, Hua2018, Haa2019, CNN-Survival, PAGE-Net, SSCNN, Xie2021, and DAFT. For instance, Hua2018 employs CNN and FFNN subnetworks, along with correlational layers, in order to learn from both pathological images and molecular profiles. The CNN-based method SurvCNN is not multimodal per se, but transforms high-dimensional omics data into an image representation in order to feed them into a CNN. CNN-Cox combines cascaded Wx (Shin et al., 2019), an NN-based algorithm selecting features based on how well they distinguish between high- and low-risk groups, with a 1D CNN architecture applied to gene expression data. Note that the choice of architecture for CNN- and AE-based methods is usually motivated by the objective of extracting information from data input (e.g., from images via CNNs or from omics data via AEs with auxiliary losses), without being very relevant to the target of estimation. This is in contrast to, e.g., RNNs, where the architecture choice is driven by the learning objective. Nine methods reviewed here use RNN architectures. Six of them — RNN-Surv, CRESA, DRSA, Kam2021, DCS, and Tho2022 — use a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), while the remaining one, Deep- Comp, does not state the RNN architecture it employs. Out of these methods, RNN-Surv, DRSA, Kam2021, and DCS do not go beyond the setting of single-risk, right-censored tabular data. For example, RNN-Surv uses the RNN to carry forward information from previous time steps, employing a sigmoid output layer Tho2022 employs the RNN architecture for multimodal learning from text, medical history, and high-frequency data, while DeepComp uses it for competing risk modeling. CRESA models both re- current events and competing risks by means of its RNN architecture. The final two RNN-based methods, Dynamic-DeepHit and RDSM, are actually extensions of the simpler FFNN-based methods DeepHit and DSM, respectively, enabling the incorporation of TVFs. Four methods — DASA, DCM, ConcatAE/CrossAE, and VAECox — use some form of AEs. Another four methods — Nnet-survival, Ava2020, MultiSurv, and DeepPAMM — do not require a specific architecture, which can instead be flexibly chosen based on application requirements; for instance, a CNN for handling image data (as in MultiSurv) or an RNN for incorporating TVFs (as in Ava2020). Three recent methods, Hu2021, SurvTRACE, and TransformerJM, use a transformer architecture, while another two novel methods, DeepCompete and survNode, use a nODE architecture. Only a single method, DATE, uses a GAN architecture (along with a custom loss). ElmCoxBAR uses an Extreme Learning Machine (ELM) architecture, which is similar to an FFNN but does not require back- propagation for optimization. SALMON, San2020, DPWTE, and SurvNet all use FFNNs, but in a modified manner. SALMON adds so-called eigengene modules, using eigengene matrices of gene co-expression modules (Zhang et al., 2014) instead of raw gene expression data as NN input. San2020 uses a Stacked Generalization Ensemble Neural Network (Wolpert, 1992), which takes a combination of DeepSurv sub-models and concate- nates them for improved hazard prediction. DPWTE adds a Sparse Weibull Mixture (SWM) layer to learn

the optimal number of Weibull distributions for the mixture model, through an element-wise multiplication of its weights by the previous layer’s output. SurvNet adds a context-gating mechanism, which is similar to the attention mechanism used in transformers, by adjusting log hazard ratios by survival probabilities from the survival classification module. WideAndDeep employs a PointNet (Qi et al., 2017) architecture to learn a latent representation of 3D shapes of the human brain while additionally learning from regular tabular data, subsequently fusing both parts. CapSurv modifies the CapsNet architecture (Sabour et al., 2017), developed for image classification, by adding a Cox loss and thus making it amenable to SA tasks. Figure 5 depicts the absolute frequencies of NN architectures among all 61 methods included in this Figure 5: Absolute frequencies of neural network architectures among all 61 methods reviewed. In this section, we discuss which methods can handle the data-related aspects introduced in Section 2.2. We start by considering outcome types and subsequently feature-related aspects. Finally, we summarize which methods offer (which kind of) interpretability of results. Regarding censoring and truncation of event times, left-censoring and right-truncation are not explicitly addressed by any of the methods reviewed. Ava2020 is capable of handling interval-censored data thanks to

the flexibility of the Survival-CRPS loss. survNode briefly addresses interval-censoring and left-truncation by stating how they would affect likelihood computations. DSM mentions that the modeling framework is amenable to these two output modalities. In DeepPAMM left-truncation is accounted for in the data Figure 6: Venn diagram illustrating which methods can handle the distinct survival outcome types. Nine methods are designed to deal with competing risks; interestingly, none of these methods is Cox- based, and four of them are discrete-time. DeepHit, CRESA, and DeepComp all assume time to be discrete and employ cause-specific subnetworks, with DeepHit using FFNNs to generate a final distribution over all competing causes for each individual; both CRESA and DeepComp use RNN architectures, yet while CRESA also generates a final distribution over all competing causes, DeepComp outputs cause-specific discrete haz- ards for each time interval. SSMTL, also discrete-time, uses an FFNN architecture, views competing risk SA as a multiclass problem, and creates a custom loss with separate components for non-censored and cen- sored individuals, as well as a ranking component. DeepCompete is a continuous-time method that employs nODE blocks within each of its cause-specific subnetworks in order to output a cumulative hazard function. DSM first learns a common representation of all competing risks by passing through a single FFNN. Based on this representation, and treating all other events as censoring, the event distribution for a single risk is then learned using cause-specific Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE); the ELBO loss is also adjusted

to treat competing events as censoring. Both survNode and IDNetwork are based on Markov processes — illness-death process and Markov jump process, respectively — and thus naturally handle competing risks and even the more general case of multi-state outcomes. Being PEM-based, DeepPAMM parametrizes the hazard rate, which is a transition rate by definition; DeepPAMM can further specify multiple transitions and therefore model competing risks as well as multi-state outcomes. Finally, two methods discuss handling of recurrent events: CRESA employs an RNN architecture with time steps representing recurrent events, while DeepPAMM uses random effects inspired by statistical mixed models. Figure 6 summarizes which outcome types beyond right-censoring the methods reviewed explicitly mention. One important feature-related aspect is time dependence, a deviation from the PH assumption imposed by traditional survival models such as Cox regression or Weibull AFT. Seven methods address TVFs: DeepHit’s and DSM ’s RNN-based extensions Dynamic-DeepHit and RDSM, as well as CRESA, Ava2020 (by choosing an RNN architecture), survNode, DeepPAMM, and TransformerJM. The technical incorporation of TVFs is, for example, achieved by converting tabular time-varying feature input into long format (DeepPAMM ) or by employing RNNs prior to each new feature measurement (survNode). TVEs constitute another deviation from the PH assumption: Seven methods are capable of modeling effects that might not be constant over time, with four of them being time-discrete approaches. Nnet-survival and MultiSurv incorporate TVEs modeling by using a fully connected NN to connect the final hidden layer’s neurons with the output nodes, while RNN-Surv captures TVEs through its RNN architecture. Cox-Time accommodates TVEs by making the Cox-style relative risk — which it parametrizes by an NN — time- dependent and DeepPAMM can address TVEs through the interaction of the follow-up time (represented as a feature) with other features. DSM and SSMTL do not provide further detail about how TVEs are being Another feature-related aspect is the integrability of high-dimensional (usually omics) data, which im- plies learning from a high-dimensional predictor space. While all DL-based methods are generally capa- ble of handling high-dimensional feature inputs, here we focus on the 18 DL-based survival methods that are explicitly designed to work with high-dimensional data, usually by applying specialized regularization techniques. 14 of these methods — Cox-nnet, Cox-PASNet and PAGE-Net, Haa2019, GDP, SALMON, ConcatAE/CrossAE, DNNSurv Sun2020, Qiu2020, VAECox, DeepOmix, CNN-Cox, CNT, and MCAP — are (partially) Cox-based. As for the remaining four methods, CNN-Survival, MultiSurv, and SurvCNN are discrete-time methods, while rcICQRNN is quantile regression-based. Finally, a total of 16 methods can (hypothetically) extract information from unstructured or multimodal features. Eight of them are (partially) CNN-based, underlining the focus on processing mostly medical image data. DeepConvSurv, CapSurv, and CNN-Survival (the last one employing transfer learning) exclusively work with imaging data without incorporating any tabular information, which is why these methods are not truly multimodal. Similarly, Nnet-survival, being flexible in terms of NN architecture, can learn from image data by choosing a CNN, yet again at the cost of discarding tabular data as only a single data modality can be handled. Hua2018 incorporates both image and molecular data yet without making any mention of tabular data. Haa2019 fine-tunes a pre-trained ResNet18, optionally concatenating it with radiomics features, and additionally leverages clinical data. PAGE-Net employs a novel patch aggregation strategy to integrate unstructured Whole Slide Images (WSIs) and structured demographic and genomic data. SSCNN creates feature maps from WSIs and employs a Siamese CNN to learn from both these feature maps as well as clinical features. (Liu et al., 2022) also use DL to extract features from WSIs in the context of survival analysis, however, not in an end-to-end approach ConcatAE/CrossAE integrates information from multiple modalities, either through modality-specific autoencoders or cross-modality translation; the integration of tabular data is, however, not explicitly men- tioned. survNode can conceptually account for multimodal features by encoding initial values with, e.g., CNN or NLP layers. The cure rate model Xie2021 only allows for (single-modality) unstructured data for determining the cure rate probability through a CNN. DAFT uses a ResNet CNN architecture as its back- bone, feeding tabular data into it through a novel Dynamic Affine Feature Map Transform (DAFT) module, which in turn enables a bidirectional information flow between image and tabular data. Finally, Tho2022

Figure 7: Venn diagram illustrating which methods can handle the distinct survival feature-related aspects. employs an RNN architecture to create an embedding for electronic patient record data (such as medical history and free text) and further fuses tabular clinical features into the model before generating survival predictions. WideAndDeep, using a Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) dataset, learns a latent representation of 3D shapes of the human brain while additionally learning from regular tabular data, subsequently fusing both parts. MultiSurv, a multimodal extension of Nnet-survival, and DeepPAMM both provide flexibility in terms of architecture choice so that, for example, image data could be incorporated by employing CNNs for the NN part; they also fuse information from the different data modalities. Figure 7 illustrates which of the methods incorporate the different types of feature-related aspects. By construction, DL methods (as well as ML methods) are more complex than the survival models considered in Section 2.3 and thus usually do not provide the same degree of interpretability. At the same time, in fields such as the life sciences, results and model outputs must be interpretable to provide a solid basis for highly sensitive decision-making (Vellido, 2020). Here, we summarize which of the methods provide Cox-nnet, Cox-PASNet, PAGE-Net and DeepOmix provide some interpretability by assigning biological meaning to the nodes of their NNs. Cox-nnet obtains biologically relevant hidden nodes, as the most vari-

able nodes can be viewed as surrogate features for discriminating patient survival and, in addition, these nodes correlate strongly with significantly enriched pathways. Cox-PASNet and PAGE-Net both possess genome-specific layers, which include a gene input layer, a pathway layer embedding prior pathway-related knowledge for biological interpretation, and data integration layers. The two methods then rank the node values of features by the average absolute partial derivatives (with respect to the data integration layers) for a pathway-based interpretation of genomic data: explicitly, pathway nodes each represent a biological path- way. PAGE-Net additionally possesses pathology-specific layers, which identify features relevant to SA from histopathological images via pre-trained CNNs; at the patient-level, these survival-discriminatory features eventually represent a histopathological WSI. DeepOmix incorporates multi-omics data via a gene input layer and prior biological and pathway knowledge via functional module layers (low-dimensional representations), guided by the idea that genes do not work in isolation but rather function as functional modules. With each node representing a non-linear function of the genes’ different attributes (e.g., mutations), DeepOmix obtains biological interpretability because it captures the (non-linear) effects of biological pathways onto By fusing the output of an NN for image data with the output of a Cox PH model for tabular data, WideAndDeep retains the interpretability of a standard Cox regression for structured features. Xie2021 also provides standard Cox model interpretability, because survival prediction is performed through non-deep Cox regression. DeepPAMM provides classical statistical interpretability of the structured effects by its architecture, with identifiability, if necessary, ensured through orthogonalization (R¨ugamer, 2023). survNode introduces a latent variable extension providing aspects of feature interpretability. The transformer-based SurvTrace method makes use of attention maps, comparing attention scores of different features across selected individuals to provide some interpretability of feature effects. It is worth noting that post-hoc methods from the field of Interpretable Machine Learning and explainable AI, such as Permutation Feature Importance (Breiman, 2001), Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explana- tions (LIME Ribeiro et al., 2016), Shapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP Lundberg et al., 2017), attention maps (Jetley et al., 2018), Layer-Wise Relevance Propagation (LRP Montavon et al., 2019), and Neural Additive Models (NAMs; Agarwal et al., 2021a), are potentially applicable to DL-based survival methods. However, this is subject to current research and it is not always clear if and how such methods need to be adjusted to account for different types of censoring, truncation or other outcome types. Several survival-specific adaptations of the abovementioned post-hoc interpretability methods have al- ready been developed; for instance, SurvLIME (Kovalev et al., 2020), SurvSHAP(t) (Krzyzi´nski et al., 2022), and SurvNAM (Utkin et al., 2022) are based on LIME, SHAP, and NAMs, respectively. Cho et al. (2023) use meta-learning and the DeepLIFT (Shrikumar et al., 2017) method to make the integration of multi-omics data in SA more interpretable. Among the papers reviewed here, SALMON explores feature importance of individual inputs, DNNSurv Sun2020 employs LIME, Tho2022 uses SHAP, and SSMTL computes post-hoc feature importance and plots feature effects on cumulative incidence curves. Qiu2020 uses a risk propagation technique called SurvivalNet (Yousefi et al., 2017), which is an explanation method specific to SA. Model Evaluation and Comparison Model evaluation is an important aspect of any machine learning pipeline, and SA in particular. Typical metrics in benchmark experiments of survival models are the C-index (usually Harrell’s (Harrell et al., 1982) or Uno’s (Uno et al., 2007)) for assessing risk predictions, and the Brier/Graf score (Graf et al., 1999) for evaluation of distribution predictions, with the C-index being by far the most popular metric among the Typically underreported are the right-censored logloss (Avati et al., 2020) and calibration measures such as D-calibration (Haider et al., 2020). Recent work also suggests that most of the previously used evaluation measures in SA do not constitute proper scoring rules (Sonabend, 2022). Proper alternatives have been proposed recently (Rindt et al., 2022; Sonabend, 2022), but have not been widely Interpretation and comparison of the self-reported benchmark experiments in different articles is often not meaningful for various reasons: The datasets used, their pre-processing, and handling of missing values is not the same. Even if the same data sets are used, the definition of resampling strategy, the exact definition of the respective evaluation metrics (e.g. different variants of C-Index, integration window of the integrated

brier score, etc.) and their use (e.g. transformation of survival distribution predictions for measures of discrimination (Sonabend et al., 2022)) are often not clearly specified or not identical. issues that hinder direct interpretation or reported results are potential issues of selective reporting and researchers degrees of freedom (selection of data sets, choice of evaluation metrics, decisions about budget and hyperparameter space for tuning of the proposed as well as competing algorithms, etc.) plagued applied sciences but have also been bemoaned in methodological research (e.g. Boulesteix et al., 2020; Nießl et al., 2022). For all these reasons, direct comparison of the performance of different methods reviewed in this article is not possible. This calls for future research to conduct neutral benchmark studies (Boulesteix et al., 2013). Such an investigation has been for example conducted for some non-DL-based ML methods on omics data (Herrmann et al., 2021). However, such studies are generally hard to conduct and require substantial effort, in particular for DL-based methods with high computational requirements, and because general purpose implementations of most of the methods reviewed here are not available and code repositories are missing for almost half of the methods (cf. Section 3.8). Sample size considerations are an equally important topic that needs further research in the context of In general, the sample size required for training a DL-based method crucially depends on the model architecture (such as the choice of network architecture and hyperparameters or the use of transfer learning) as well as on the input data modalities (e.g., whether images or high-dimensional omics data are being used), and the assumed data generating process. In addition, sample size calculations are very task-specific: Fang et al. (2021) show that the required sample size for organ auto-segmentation critically depends on the organ to be segmented. Overall, sample size calculation in DL is still quite rare, being an active field of research itself (Shahinfar et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2021). For instance, in ML-based medical imaging analysis, a systematic review of methodologies for sample size calculation by Balki et al. (2019) identified only four such methods, highlighting the need for future work in this area. This is particularly true for DL-based SA, as, to our knowledge, there is currently no research published on sample size calculation in this specific area. Generally, in SA, the power for detection of effects does not depend on the overall sample size but rather on the number of events (for a specific transition). As a consequence, censoring, truncation and other outcome-related specifics need to be taken into account. For example, effects on the development of a rare condition could be hard to detect if there is a competing event with high prevalence. Additionally taking into account imaging data will generally make the assumed data generating process and therefore sample size calculation more complex. As for more complex statistical models, simulation-based sample size calculation could be a way to go in the future (Snell et al., 2021). The papers reviewed in this work do not explicitly address sample size requirements. In our Main Table we included a column that indicates the minimum dataset size among all benchmarked datasets used for each method. However, this answers a different question about applicability. Most of the methods reviewed will be applicable to rather small data sets, however, their ability to learn anything and outperform simpler baseline models will usually decrease with diminishing sample size. Code and data accessibility foster open and reproducible research. The availability of code can indicate a method’s maturity and its general applicability to new use cases. However, the code of algorithms and benchmark experiments is not publicly accessible for 25 methods. Furthermore, the accompanying codes of 28 methods are one-shot implementations and have not yet been processed into easy-to-use packages. Data availability ensures that the reported results can be reproduced and are available for future benchmark experiments. The Main Table summarizes reproducibility aspects (in terms of code and data) for all methods. For usability and reproducibility, new methods should ideally be packaged and also integrated within one of the general purpose suits for machine learning and benchmarking for survival analysis such as auton-survival (Nagpal et al., 2022), mlr3proba (Sonabend et al., 2021), pycox (Kvamme et al., 2019b), scikit-survival (P¨olsterl, 2020), or similar.

SA is concerned with modeling the time until an event of interest occurs while accounting for censoring, truncation, and other aspects of time-to-event data (cf. Section 2.2). In this paper, we provide a structured, comprehensive review of DL-based survival methods, from a theoretical as well as practical perspective. In doing so, we aim to enable practitioners to quickly gauge the methods available for their specific use case as well as to help researchers to identify the most promising areas for future research. The main results are summarized in an open-source, interactive, editable table (https://survival-org.github.io/DL4Survival). All data, figures, and code scripts used in this work can be found in the corresponding repository (https://github.com/survival-org/DL4Survival). We conclude that most methodologically innovative DL-based survival methods are survival-specific ap- plications of novel methods developed in other areas of DL, such as computer vision or NLP. This usually yields a more flexible estimation of associations of (structured and unstructured) features with the outcome, rather than solving problems of time-to-event data not addressed by, e.g., statistical approaches. Outcome types beyond right-censoring and competing risks are rarely addressed, potentially due to a limited number Further, little attention has been paid to optimization (e.g., choice of optimizers, tuning of hyperparam- eters, or neural architecture search) among the methods reviewed here, as they usually focus on network architecture, data modalities, and specific use cases. Among those articles that did elaborate on optimization, the Adam optimizer (Kingma et al., 2015) appears to be the most common choice. There are also some challenges specific to DL-based SA. In the parametric setting, many common log-likelihood-based losses for survival analysis are poorly conditioned. For example, modeling a Weibull distribution that assumes errors from an extreme value distribution (with standardized density f(t) = exp(−t) exp(−exp(−t))) may be particularly challenging when being optimized with gradient descent and low precision. Similarly, Avati et al. (2020) recommend the log-normal distribution since optimization of other distributions that are suitable for time-to-event data suffers from numerical instability, as their densi- ties have forms of type (tθ1)θ2 (where θ1 and θ2 are parameters of interest) or contain the Gamma function. Their optimization will be particularly challenging, when all parameters of a distribution are learned depend- ing on features (cf. (4)). Batching is another issue specific to DL-based optimization. In semi-parametric models like the Cox model, batching might become problematic, as already discussed in 3.3.1. More gen- erally, batching might need to be adapted, depending on the survival task. In recurrent events settings, for example, batching might need to be set up differently, depending on whether one wants to predict next recurrence for all subjects (given previous recurrences) or the entire process for a new subject. Finally, the lack of openly accessible, high-dimensional, potentially multimodal datasets remains a major challenge to the development and training of novel DL-based survival methods. Missing values are rarely discussed within the methods we reviewed; indeed, most methods implicitly require missing values to be taken care of during data preprocessing. Explicit handling of missing values in the time-to-event setting is done only by MultiSurv and SurvNet. In terms of their application, DL-based survival methods have been deployed in estimating patient survival based on medical images (usually CT scans of a particular anomaly) or (multi-)omics data — as evidenced by the large majority of multimodal or high-dimensional methods in this review. Moreover, some methods are explicitly motivated by a specific clinical use case: DASA by prostate cancer; Haa2019, su-DeepBTS, and SurvNet by lung cancer; SALMON, ConcatAE/CrossAE, and Liu2022 by breast cancer; and MCAP by ovarian cancer. Other areas of application of DL-based survival methods include improved estimation of prognostic indices (Bice et al., 2020) and of recurrence after cancer surgery (Lee et al., 2020). The choice of datasets used for benchmarking (see Main Table) provides further information about the application cases In summary, deep survival methodology has advanced substantially in recent years and will certainly continue to benefit from developments in ML/DL, with big methodological advances being likely to swap In particular, generative DL techniques like diffusion are promising candidates for adaptation to survival tasks. The rapid progress in this area of research is also why any overview work can never be fully exhaustive or up-to-date. Therefore, we actively encourage the research community to contribute to our open-source interactive table (https://survival-org.github.io/DL4Survival).

Aastha, P. Huang, and Y. Liu (Jan. 2021). “DeepCompete : A deep learning approach to competing risks in continuous time domain”. In: AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings 2020, pp. 177–186. issn: 1942-597X. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8075516/ (visited on 11/17/2021). Agarwal, R., L. Melnick, N. Frosst, X. Zhang, B. Lengerich, R. Caruana, and G. E. Hinton (2021a). “Neural additive models: Interpretable machine learning with neural nets”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 34, pp. 4699–4711. Agarwal, S., M. Eltigani Osman Abaker, and O. Daescu (2021b). “Survival prediction based on histopathol- ogy imaging and clinical data: A novel, whole slide cnn approach”. In: Medical Image Computing and Com- puter Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2021: 24th International Conference, Strasbourg, France, September 27–October 1, 2021, Proceedings, Part V 24. Springer, pp. 762–771. Ausset, G., T. Ciffreo, F. Portier, S. Cl´emen¸con, and T. Papin (2021). “Individual Survival Curves with Con- ditional Normalizing Flows”. In: 2021 IEEE 8th International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA), pp. 1–10. doi: 10.1109/DSAA53316.2021.9564222. Avati, A., T. Duan, S. Zhou, K. Jung, N. H. Shah, and A. Y. Ng (2020). “Countdown regression: sharp and calibrated survival predictions”. In: Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. PMLR, pp. 145–155. Balki, I., A. Amirabadi, J. Levman, A. L. Martel, Z. Emersic, B. Meden, A. Garcia-Pedrero, S. C. Ramirez, D. Kong, A. R. Moody, et al. (2019). “Sample-size determination methodologies for machine learning in medical imaging research: a systematic review”. In: Canadian Association of Radiologists Journal 70.4, Ballard, D. H. (1987). “Modular learning in neural networks.” In: Aaai. Vol. 647, pp. 279–284. Bender, A., A. Groll, and F. Scheipl (2018). “A generalized additive model approach to time-to-event anal- ysis”. In: Statistical Modelling 18.3-4, pp. 299–321. Bender, A., D. R¨ugamer, F. Scheipl, and B. Bischl (Feb. 2021). “A General Machine Learning Framework for Survival Analysis”. en. In: Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases. Ed. by F. Hutter, K. Kersting, J. Lijffijt, and I. Valera. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 158–173. isbn: 978-3-030-67664-3. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-67664-3_10. Bennis, A., S. Mouysset, and M. Serrurier (2020). “Estimation of conditional mixture Weibull distribution with right censored data using neural network for time-to-event analysis”. In: Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining: 24th Pacific-Asia Conference, PAKDD 2020, Singapore, May 11–14, 2020, Proceedings, Part I 24. Springer, pp. 687–698. — (2021). “DPWTE: A Deep Learning Approach to Survival Analysis Using a Parsimonious Mixture of Weibull Distributions”. en. In: Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning – ICANN 2021. Ed. by I. Farkaˇs, P. Masulli, S. Otte, and S. Wermter. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 185–196. isbn: 978-3-030-86340-1. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-86340-1_15. Bice, N., N. Kirby, T. Bahr, K. Rasmussen, D. Saenz, T. Wagner, N. Papanikolaou, and M. Fakhreddine (2020). “Deep learning-based survival analysis for brain metastasis patients with the national cancer database”. In: Journal of applied clinical medical physics 21.9, pp. 187–192. Biganzoli, E., P. Boracchi, L. Mariani, and E. Marubini (1998). “Feed forward neural networks for the analysis of censored survival data: a partial logistic regression approach”. In: Statistics in medicine 17.10, Binder, H. and M. Schumacher (2008). “Allowing for mandatory covariates in boosting estimation of sparse high-dimensional survival models”. In: BMC bioinformatics 9.1, pp. 1–10. Boulesteix, A.-L., S. Hoffmann, A. Charlton, and H. Seibold (2020). “A Replication Crisis in Methodolog- ical Research?” In: Significance 17.5. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1740-9713.01444, pp. 18–21. issn: 1740-9713. doi: 10.1111/1740-9713.01444. (Visited on 11/22/2022). Boulesteix, A.-L., S. Lauer, and M. J. A. Eugster (Apr. 2013). “A Plea for Neutral Comparison Studies in Computational Sciences”. In: PLOS ONE 8.4. https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0061562 e61562. issn: 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061562. (Visited on 10/04/2023). Breiman, L. (2001). “Random forests”. In: Machine learning 45, pp. 5–32. Brown, S. F., A. J. Branford, and W. Moran (1997). “On the use of artificial neural networks for the analysis of survival data”. In: IEEE transactions on neural networks 8.5, pp. 1071–1077.

Chai, H., L. Guo, M. He, Z. Zhang, and Y. Yang (2022). “A Multi-constraint Deep Semi-supervised Learning Method for Ovarian Cancer Prognosis Prediction”. In: Advances in Swarm Intelligence: 13th International Conference, ICSI 2022, Xi’an, China, July 15–19, 2022, Proceedings, Part II. Springer, pp. 219–229. Chapfuwa, P., C. Tao, C. Li, C. Page, B. Goldstein, L. C. Duke, and R. Henao (2018). “Adversarial time- to-event modeling”. In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, pp. 735–744. Chen, R. T. Q., Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. Duvenaud (2018). “Neural ordinary differential equa- tions”. In: Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. NIPS’18. Montr´eal, Canada: Curran Associates Inc., pp. 6572–6583. Chi, S., Y. Tian, F. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Chen, and J. Li (Aug. 2021). “Deep Semisupervised Multitask Learning Model and Its Interpretability for Survival Analysis”. In: IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 25.8, pp. 3185–3196. issn: 2168-2194, 2168-2208. doi: 10.1109/JBHI.2021.3064696. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9373895/ (visited on 11/30/2021). Ching, T., X. Zhu, and L. X. Garmire (2018). “Cox-nnet: an artificial neural network method for prognosis prediction of high-throughput omics data”. In: PLoS computational biology 14.4, e1006076. Cho, H. J., M. Shu, S. Bekiranov, C. Zang, and A. Zhang (2023). “Interpretable meta-learning of multi-omics data for survival analysis and pathway enrichment”. In: Bioinformatics 39.4, btad113. Cottin, A., N. Pecuchet, M. Zulian, A. Guilloux, and S. Katsahian (2022). “IDNetwork: A deep illness-death network based on multi-state event history process for disease prognostication”. In: Statistics in Medicine Cox, D. R. (1972). “Regression models and life-tables”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) 34.2, pp. 187–202. Deepa, P. and C. Gunavathi (2022). “A systematic review on machine learning and deep learning techniques in cancer survival prediction”. In: Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology. Fan, Y., S. Zhang, and S. Ma (2022). “Survival Analysis with High-Dimensional Omics Data Using a Thresh- old Gradient Descent Regularization-Based Neural Network Approach”. In: Genes 13.9, p. 1674. Fang, Y., J. Wang, X. Ou, H. Ying, C. Hu, Z. Zhang, and W. Hu (2021). “The impact of training sample size on deep learning-based organ auto-segmentation for head-and-neck patients”. In: Physics in Medicine & Biology 66.18, p. 185012. Faraggi, D. and R. Simon (1995). “A neural network model for survival data”. In: Statistics in medicine Fornili, M., F. Ambrogi, P. Boracchi, and E. Biganzoli (2013). “Piecewise exponential artificial neural net- works (PEANN) for modeling hazard function with right censored data”. In: International Meeting on Computational Intelligence Methods for Bioinformatics and Biostatistics. Springer, pp. 125–136. Fotso, S. (Jan. 2018). “Deep Neural Networks for Survival Analysis Based on a Multi-Task Framework”. In: arXiv:1801.05512 [cs, stat]. arXiv: 1801.05512. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.05512 (visited on Friedman, M. (1982). “Piecewise exponential models for survival data with covariates”. In: The Annals of Statistics 10.1, pp. 101–113. Fuhlert, P., A. Ernst, E. Dietrich, F. Westhaeusser, K. Kloiber, and S. Bonn (2022). “Deep Learning-Based Discrete Calibrated Survival Prediction”. In: 2022 IEEE International Conference on Digital Health (ICDH). IEEE, pp. 169–174. Gensheimer, M. F. and B. Narasimhan (2019). “A scalable discrete-time survival model for neural networks”. In: PeerJ 7, e6257. Giunchiglia, E., A. Nemchenko, and M. van der Schaar (2018). “RNN-SURV: A Deep Recurrent Model for Survival Analysis”. en. In: Artificial Neural Networks and Machine Learning – ICANN 2018. Ed. by V. K˚urkov´a, Y. Manolopoulos, B. Hammer, L. Iliadis, and I. Maglogiannis. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 23–32. isbn: 978-3-030-01424-7. doi: 10.1007/ Goodfellow, I. J., J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. C. Courville, and Y. Bengio (2014). “Generative Adversarial Nets”. In: NIPS. Graf, E., C. Schmoor, W. Sauerbrei, and M. Schumacher (1999). “Assessment and comparison of prognostic classification schemes for survival data”. In: Statistics in Medicine 18.17-18, pp. 2529–2545. issn: 0277- 6715. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0258(19990915/30)18:17/18<2529::AID-SIM274>3.0.CO;2-5. url:

Groha, S., S. M. Schmon, and A. Gusev (Feb. 2021). “A General Framework for Survival Analysis and Multi-State Modelling”. In: arXiv:2006.04893 [cs, stat]. arXiv: 2006.04893. url: http://arxiv.org/ abs/2006.04893 (visited on 03/20/2021). Gupta, G., V. Sunder, R. Prasad, and G. Shroff (2019). “Cresa: a deep learning approach to competing risks, recurrent event survival analysis”. In: Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining: 23rd Pacific- Asia Conference, PAKDD 2019, Macau, China, April 14-17, 2019, Proceedings, Part II 23. Springer, Haarburger, C., P. Weitz, O. Rippel, and D. Merhof (Apr. 2019). “Image-Based Survival Prediction for Lung Cancer Patients Using CNNS”. In: 2019 IEEE 16th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2019). ISSN: 1945-8452, pp. 1197–1201. doi: 10.1109/ISBI.2019.8759499. Haider, H., B. Hoehn, S. Davis, and R. Greiner (2020). “Effective ways to build and evaluate individual survival distributions”. In: The Journal of Machine Learning Research 21.1, pp. 3289–3351. Hao, J., Y. Kim, T. Mallavarapu, J. H. Oh, and M. Kang (Dec. 2018). “Cox-PASNet: Pathway-based Sparse Deep Neural Network for Survival Analysis”. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), pp. 381–386. doi: 10.1109/BIBM.2018.8621345. Hao, J., S. C. Kosaraju, N. Z. Tsaku, D. H. Song, and M. Kang (2019). “PAGE-Net: interpretable and integrative deep learning for survival analysis using histopathological images and genomic data”. In: Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 2020. World Scientific, pp. 355–366. Harrell, F. E., R. M. Califf, and D. B. Pryor (May 1982). “Evaluating the yield of medical tests”. In: JAMA 247.18, pp. 2543–2546. issn: 0098-7484. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.1982. He, K., X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun (2016). “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 770–778. Herrmann, M., P. Probst, R. Hornung, V. Jurinovic, and A.-L. Boulesteix (2021). “Large-scale bench- mark study of survival prediction methods using multi-omics data”. In: Briefings in bioinformatics 22.3, Hornik, K., M. Stinchcombe, and H. White (1989). “Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approxi- mators”. In: Neural networks 2.5, pp. 359–366. Hu, S., E. Fridgeirsson, G. v. Wingen, and M. Welling (May 2021). “Transformer-Based Deep Survival Anal- ysis”. en. In: Proceedings of AAAI Spring Symposium on Survival Prediction - Algorithms, Challenges, and Applications 2021. ISSN: 2640-3498. PMLR, pp. 132–148. url: https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v146/hu21a.html (visited on 10/31/2021). Huang, C., A. Zhang, and G. Xiao (Jan. 2018). “Deep Integrative Analysis for Survival Prediction”. en. In: Biocomputing 2018. Kohala Coast, Hawaii, USA: WORLD SCIENTIFIC, pp. 343–352. doi: 10.1142/ 0032 (visited on 12/16/2021). Huang, Z., X. Zhan, S. Xiang, T. S. Johnson, B. Helm, C. Y. Yu, J. Zhang, P. Salama, M. Rizkalla, Z. Han, et al. (2019). “SALMON: survival analysis learning with multi-omics neural networks on breast cancer”. In: Frontiers in genetics 10, p. 166. Irvin, J., P. Rajpurkar, M. Ko, Y. Yu, S. Ciurea-Ilcus, C. Chute, H. Marklund, B. Haghgoo, R. Ball, K. Shpanskaya, et al. (2019). “Chexpert: A large chest radiograph dataset with uncertainty labels and expert comparison”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence. Vol. 33. 01, pp. 590–597. Ishwaran, H., U. B. Kogalur, E. H. Blackstone, M. S. Lauer, et al. (2008). “Random survival forests”. In: The annals of applied statistics 2.3, pp. 841–860. Ivakhnenko, A. G., V. G. Lapa, and V. G. Lapa (1967). Cybernetics and forecasting techniques. Vol. 8. American Elsevier Publishing Company. Jetley, S., N. Lord, N. Lee, and P. Torr (2018). “Learn to pay attention”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations. International Conference on Learning Representations. Jing, B., T. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Jin, K. Liu, W. Qiu, L. Ke, Y. Sun, C. He, D. Hou, et al. (2019). “A deep survival analysis method based on ranking”. In: Artificial intelligence in medicine 98, pp. 1–9. Kalakoti, Y., S. Yadav, and D. Sundar (2021). “SurvCNN: a discrete time-to-event cancer survival estimation framework using image representations of omics data”. In: Cancers 13.13, p. 3106.

Kalbfleisch, J. D. and R. L. Prentice (2011). The statistical analysis of failure time data. John Wiley & Sons. Kamran, F. and J. Wiens (2021). “Estimating calibrated individualized survival curves with deep learning”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 35. 1, pp. 240–248. Kaplan, E. L. and P. Meier (1958). “Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations”. In: Journal of the American statistical association 53.282, pp. 457–481. Katzman, J. L., U. Shaham, A. Cloninger, J. Bates, T. Jiang, and Y. Kluger (2018). “DeepSurv: personalized treatment recommender system using a Cox proportional hazards deep neural network”. In: BMC medical research methodology 18.1, p. 24. Kim, S., K. Kim, J. Choe, I. Lee, and J. Kang (July 2020). “Improved survival analysis by learning shared genomic information from pan-cancer data”. en. In: Bioinformatics 36.Supplement 1, pp. i389–i398. issn: 1367-4803, 1460-2059. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa462. url: https://academic.oup.com/ bioinformatics/article/36/Supplement_1/i389/5870509 (visited on 12/01/2021). Kingma, D. P. and J. Ba (2015). “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization.” In: ICLR (Poster). Ed. by Y. Bengio and Y. LeCun. url: http://dblp.uni- trier.de/db/conf/iclr/iclr2015.html# Kingma, D. P. and M. Welling (2014). “Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes”. In: 2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014, Conference Track Proceedings. arXiv: http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114v10 [stat.ML]. Klein, J. P. and M. L. Moeschberger (1997). Survival analysis: Techniques for censored and truncated data. New York: Springer. isbn: 978-0-387-94829-4. Kopper, P., S. P¨olsterl, C. Wachinger, B. Bischl, A. Bender, and D. R¨ugamer (2021). “Semi-structured deep piecewise exponential models”. In: Survival Prediction-Algorithms, Challenges and Applications. PMLR, Kopper, P., S. Wiegrebe, B. Bischl, A. Bender, and D. R¨ugamer (2022). “DeepPAMM: Deep Piecewise Exponential Additive Mixed Models for Complex Hazard Structures in Survival Analysis”. In: Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining: 26th Pacific-Asia Conference, PAKDD 2022, Chengdu, China, May 16–19, 2022, Proceedings, Part II. Springer, pp. 249–261. Kovalev, M. S., L. V. Utkin, and E. M. Kasimov (Sept. 2020). “SurvLIME: A method for explaining machine learning survival models”. en. In: Knowledge-Based Systems 203, p. 106164. issn: 0950-7051. doi: 10. S0950705120304044 (visited on 01/12/2022). Krzyzi´nski, M., M. Spytek, H. Baniecki, and P. Biecek (2022). “SurvSHAP (t): Time-dependent explanations of machine learning survival models”. In: Knowledge-Based Systems, p. 110234. Kvamme, H. and Ø. Borgan (Oct. 2019a). “Continuous and Discrete-Time Survival Prediction with Neural Networks”. In: arXiv:1910.06724 [cs, stat]. arXiv: 1910.06724. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.06724 — (2021). “Continuous and discrete-time survival prediction with neural networks”. In: Lifetime data anal- ysis 27, pp. 710–736. Kvamme, H., Ø. Borgan, and I. Scheel (2019b). “Time-to-event prediction with neural networks and Cox regression”. In: Journal of machine learning research 20.129, pp. 1–30. LeCun, Y., B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard, W. Hubbard, and L. D. Jackel (1989). “Backpropagation applied to handwritten zip code recognition”. In: Neural computation 1.4, pp. 541– Lee, B., S. H. Chun, J. H. Hong, I. S. Woo, S. Kim, J. W. Jeong, J. J. Kim, H. W. Lee, S. J. Na, K. S. Beck, B. Gil, S. Park, H. J. An, and Y. H. Ko (Feb. 2020). “DeepBTS: Prediction of Recurrence-free Survival of Non-small Cell Lung Cancer Using a Time-binned Deep Neural Network”. en. In: Scientific Reports 10.1. Bandiera abtest: a Cc license type: cc by Cg type: Nature Research Journals Number: 1 Primary atype: Research Publisher: Nature Publishing Group Subject term: Computational science;Non-small-cell lung cancer Subject term id: computational-science;non-small-cell-lung-cancer, p. 1952. issn: 2045-2322. doi: Lee, C., J. Yoon, and M. Van Der Schaar (2019a). “Dynamic-Deephit: A deep learning approach for dynamic survival analysis with competing risks based on longitudinal data”. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 67.1, pp. 122–133.

Lee, C., W. R. Zame, J. Yoon, and M. van der Schaar (2018). “DeepHit: A Deep Learning Approach to Survival Analysis With Competing Risks.” In: AAAI, pp. 2314–2321. Lee, S. C. and E. T. Lee (1975). “Fuzzy neural networks”. In: Mathematical Biosciences 23.1-2, pp. 151–177. Lee, S. and H. Lim (2019b). “Review of statistical methods for survival analysis using genomic data”. In: Genomics & informatics 17.4. Li, Y., W. Jia, Y. Kang, T. Chen, X. Li, X. Du, J. Dong, C. Ma, F. Wang, and G. Xie (Dec. 2020). “Deep- Comp: Which Competing Event Will Hit the Patient First?” In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM), pp. 629–636. doi: 10.1109/BIBM49941.2020.9313333. Liestbl, K., P. K. Andersen, and U. Andersen (1994). “Survival analysis and neural nets”. In: Statistics in medicine 13.12, pp. 1189–1200. Lin, J. and S. Luo (2022). “Deep learning for the dynamic prediction of multivariate longitudinal and survival data”. In: Statistics in medicine 41.15, pp. 2894–2907. Liu, H. and T. Kurc (2022). “Deep learning for survival analysis in breast cancer with whole slide image data”. In: Bioinformatics 38.14, pp. 3629–3637. Lundberg, S. M. and S.-I. Lee (2017). “A unified approach to interpreting model predictions”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 30. Meister, R. and C. Schaefer (2008). “Statistical methods for estimating the probability of spontaneous abor- tion in observational studies—analyzing pregnancies exposed to coumarin derivatives”. In: Reproductive Toxicology 26.1, pp. 31–35. Montavon, G., A. Binder, S. Lapuschkin, W. Samek, and K.-R. M¨uller (2019). “Layer-wise relevance propa- gation: an overview”. In: Explainable AI: interpreting, explaining and visualizing deep learning, pp. 193– Nagpal, C., W. Potosnak, and A. Dubrawski (2022). “auton-survival: An open-source package for regression, counterfactual estimation, evaluation and phenotyping with censored time-to-event data”. In: Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference. PMLR, pp. 585–608. Nagpal, C., S. Yadlowsky, N. Rostamzadeh, and K. Heller (2021a). “Deep Cox mixtures for survival regres- sion”. In: Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference. PMLR, pp. 674–708. Nagpal, C., X. Li, and A. Dubrawski (2021b). “Deep survival machines: Fully parametric survival regression and representation learning for censored data with competing risks”. In: IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 25.8, pp. 3163–3175. Nagpal, C., V. Jeanselme, and A. Dubrawski (2021c). “Deep parametric time-to-event regression with time- varying covariates”. In: Survival Prediction-Algorithms, Challenges and Applications. PMLR, pp. 184– Nezhad, M. Z., N. Sadati, K. Yang, and D. Zhu (Jan. 2019). “A Deep Active Survival Analysis approach for precision treatment recommendations: Application of prostate cancer”. en. In: Expert Systems with Applications 115, pp. 16–26. issn: 0957-4174. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2018 . 07 . 070. url: https : //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417418304949 (visited on 07/23/2021). Nießl, C., M. Herrmann, C. Wiedemann, G. Casalicchio, and A.-L. Boulesteix (2022). “Over-Optimism in Benchmark Studies and the Multiplicity of Design and Analysis Options When Interpreting Their Re- sults”. In: WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 12.2. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/widm.144 e1441. issn: 1942-4795. doi: 10.1002/widm.1441. (Visited on 11/22/2022). Noordzij, M., K. Leffondr´e, K. J. van Stralen, C. Zoccali, F. W. Dekker, and K. J. Jager (2013). “When do we need competing risks methods for survival analysis in nephrology?” In: Nephrology Dialysis Trans- plantation 28.11, pp. 2670–2677. P¨olsterl, S. (2020). “scikit-survival: A Library for Time-to-Event Analysis Built on Top of scikit-learn”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 21.212, pp. 1–6. url: http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20- P¨olsterl, S., I. Sarasua, B. Guti´errez-Becker, and C. Wachinger (2020). “A Wide and Deep Neural Network for Survival Analysis from Anatomical Shape and Tabular Clinical Data”. en. In: Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases. Ed. by P. Cellier and K. Driessens. Communications in Computer and Information Science. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 453–464. isbn: 978-3-030-43823-4.

Qi, C. R., H. Su, K. Mo, and L. J. Guibas (2017). “Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets for 3d classification and segmentation”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, Qin, X., D. Yin, X. Dong, D. Chen, and S. Zhang (2022). “Survival prediction model for right-censored data based on improved composite quantile regression neural network.” In: Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering: MBE 19.8, pp. 7521–7542. Qiu, Y. L., H. Zheng, A. Devos, H. Selby, and O. Gevaert (2020). “A meta-learning approach for genomic survival analysis”. In: Nature communications 11.1, p. 6350. Ramjith, J., K. C. Roes, H. J. Zar, and M. A. Jonker (2021). “Flexible modelling of risk factors on the incidence of pneumonia in young children in South Africa using piece-wise exponential additive mixed modelling”. In: BMC Medical Research Methodology 21.1, pp. 1–13. Ranganath, R., A. Perotte, N. Elhadad, and D. Blei (2016). “Deep survival analysis”. In: Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference. PMLR, pp. 101–114. Ren, K., J. Qin, L. Zheng, Z. Yang, W. Zhang, L. Qiu, and Y. Yu (2019). “Deep recurrent survival analysis”. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 33. 01, pp. 4798–4805. Rezende, D. and S. Mohamed (2015). “Variational inference with normalizing flows”. In: International con- ference on machine learning. PMLR, pp. 1530–1538. Ribeiro, M. T., S. Singh, and C. Guestrin (2016). “” Why should i trust you?” Explaining the predictions of any classifier”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1135–1144. Rindt, D., R. Hu, D. Steinsaltz, and D. Sejdinovic (2022). “Survival regression with proper scoring rules and monotonic neural networks”. In: pp. 1190–1205. Rosenblatt, F. (1967). “Recent work on theoretical models of biological memory”. In: Computer and infor- mation sciences II, pp. 33–56. Ruder, S. (2017). “An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05098. R¨ugamer, D. (July 2023). “A New PHO-rmula for Improved Performance of Semi-Structured Networks”. In: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/rugamer23a.html, pp. 29291–29305. issn: 2640-3498. (Visited on R¨ugamer, D., C. Kolb, and N. Klein (2023). “Semi-Structured Distributional Regression”. In: The American Statistician 0.0, pp. 1–12. doi: 10.1080/00031305.2022.2164054. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/ Rumelhart, D. E., G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams (1986). “Learning representations by back-propagating errors”. In: nature 323.6088, pp. 533–536. Sabour, S., N. Frosst, and G. E. Hinton (2017). “Dynamic routing between capsules”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 30. Sansaengtham, B., V. C. Barroso, and P. Phunchongharn (2020). “Survival Analysis For Computing Systems Using A Deep Ensemble Network”. In: 2020 IEEE 6th International Conference on Control Science and Systems Engineering (ICCSSE). IEEE, pp. 57–62. Schwarzer, G., W. Vach, and M. Schumacher (2000). “On the misuses of artificial neural networks for prognostic and diagnostic classification in oncology”. In: Statistics in medicine 19.4, pp. 541–561. Shahinfar, S., P. Meek, and G. Falzon (2020). ““How many images do I need?” Understanding how sample size per class affects deep learning model performance metrics for balanced designs in autonomous wildlife monitoring”. In: Ecological Informatics 57, p. 101085. Shin, B., S. Park, J. H. Hong, H. J. An, S. H. Chun, K. Kang, Y.-H. Ahn, Y. H. Ko, and K. Kang (2019). “Cascaded Wx: A novel prognosis-related feature selection framework in human lung adenocarcinoma transcriptomes”. In: Frontiers in Genetics 10, p. 662. Shrikumar, A., P. Greenside, and A. Kundaje (2017). “Learning important features through propagating activation differences”. In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR, pp. 3145–3153. Snell, K. I. E., L. Archer, J. Ensor, L. J. Bonnett, T. P. A. Debray, B. Phillips, G. S. Collins, and R. D. Riley (July 2021). “External Validation of Clinical Prediction Models: Simulation-Based Sample Size Calculations Were More Reliable than Rules-of-Thumb”. In: Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 135. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0895435621000482, pp. 79–89. issn: 0895-4356. doi: 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2021.02.011. (Visited on 10/04/2023).

Sohl-Dickstein, J., E. A. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli (2015). “Deep Unsupervised Learning using Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics”. In: ICML. Sonabend, R. (2022). “Scoring rules in survival analysis”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05260. Sonabend, R., A. Bender, and S. Vollmer (Sept. 2022). “Avoiding C-hacking When Evaluating Survival Distri- bution Predictions with Discrimination Measures”. In: Bioinformatics 38.17. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btac4 pp. 4178–4184. issn: 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btac451. (Visited on 11/02/2022). Sonabend, R., F. J. Kir´aly, A. Bender, B. Bischl, and M. Lang (Feb. 2021). “mlr3proba: An R Pack- age for Machine Learning in Survival Analysis”. In: Bioinformatics. issn: 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/ Sonabend, R. E. B. (2021). “A Theoretical and Methodological Framework for Machine Learning in Survival Analysis: Enabling Transparent and Accessible Predictive Modelling on Right-Censored Time-to-Event Data”. PhD. University College London (UCL), p. 345. url: https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/id/ Steele, A. J., S. C. Denaxas, A. D. Shah, H. Hemingway, and N. M. Luscombe (2018). “Machine learning models in electronic health records can outperform conventional survival models for predicting patient mortality in coronary artery disease”. In: PloS one 13.8, e0202344. Sun, T., Y. Wei, W. Chen, and Y. Ding (2020). “Genome-wide association study-based deep learning for survival prediction”. In: Statistics in medicine 39.30, pp. 4605–4620. Tang, B., A. Li, B. Li, and M. Wang (2019). “CapSurv: Capsule Network for Survival Analysis With Whole Slide Pathological Images”. In: IEEE Access 7. Conference Name: IEEE Access, pp. 26022–26030. issn: Thorsen-Meyer, H.-C., D. Placido, B. S. Kaas-Hansen, A. P. Nielsen, T. Lange, A. B. Nielsen, P. Toft, J. Schierbeck, T. Strøm, P. J. Chmura, et al. (2022). “Discrete-time survival analysis in the critically ill: a deep learning approach using heterogeneous data”. In: NPJ digital medicine 5.1, p. 142. Tong, J. and X. Zhao (2022). “Deep survival algorithm based on nuclear norm”. In: Journal of Statistical Computation and Simulation 92.9, pp. 1964–1976. Tong, L., J. Mitchel, K. Chatlin, and M. D. Wang (Dec. 2020). “Deep learning based feature-level integration of multi-omics data for breast cancer patients survival analysis”. en. In: BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 20.1, p. 225. issn: 1472-6947. doi: 10.1186/s12911- 020- 01225- 8. url: https: Tutz, G., M. Schmid, et al. (2016). Modeling discrete time-to-event data. Springer. Uno, H., T. Cai, L. Tian, and L. J. Wei (2007). “Evaluating Prediction Rules for t-Year Survivors with Censored Regression Models”. In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 102.478, pp. 527–537. issn: 01621459. url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/27639883. Utkin, L. V., E. D. Satyukov, and A. V. Konstantinov (2022). “SurvNAM: The machine learning survival model explanation”. In: Neural Networks 147, pp. 81–102. Vale-Silva, L. A. and K. Rohr (2021). “Long-term cancer survival prediction using multimodal deep learning”. In: Scientific Reports 11.1, p. 13505. Vaswani, A., N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin (2017). “Attention is all you need”. In: Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. NIPS’17. Long Beach, California, USA: Curran Associates Inc., pp. 6000–6010. isbn: Vellido, A. (2020). “The importance of interpretability and visualization in machine learning for applications in medicine and health care”. In: Neural computing and applications 32.24, pp. 18069–18083. Vincent, P., H. Larochelle, I. Lajoie, Y. Bengio, P.-A. Manzagol, and L. Bottou (2010). “Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representations in a deep network with a local denoising criterion.” In: Journal of machine learning research 11.12. Wang, H. and G. Li (2019a). “Extreme learning machine Cox model for high-dimensional survival analysis”. In: Statistics in medicine 38.12, pp. 2139–2156. Wang, J., N. Chen, J. Guo, X. Xu, L. Liu, and Z. Yi (2021). “SurvNet: A Novel Deep Neural Network for Lung Cancer Survival Analysis With Missing Values”. In: Frontiers in Oncology 10, p. 3128. issn: 2234-943X. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2020.588990. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10. 3389/fonc.2020.588990 (visited on 12/02/2021).

Wang, P., Y. Li, and C. K. Reddy (2019b). “Machine learning for survival analysis: A survey”. In: ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 51.6, pp. 1–36. Wang, Z. and J. Sun (2022). “Survtrace: Transformers for survival analysis with competing events”. In: Proceedings of the 13th ACM International Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology and Health Informatics, pp. 1–9. Wijethilake, N., D. Meedeniya, C. Chitraranjan, I. Perera, M. Islam, and H. Ren (2021). “Glioma survival analysis empowered with data engineering—a survey”. In: Ieee Access 9, pp. 43168–43191. Wolf, T. N., S. P¨olsterl, C. Wachinger, A. D. N. Initiative, et al. (2022). “DAFT: A universal module to interweave tabular data and 3D images in CNNs”. In: NeuroImage 260, p. 119505. Wolpert, D. H. (1992). “Stacked generalization”. In: Neural networks 5.2, pp. 241–259. Wu, C., F. Zhou, J. Ren, X. Li, Y. Jiang, and S. Ma (2019). “A selective review of multi-level omics data integration using variable selection”. In: High-throughput 8.1, p. 4. Xie, G., C. Dong, Y. Kong, J. F. Zhong, M. Li, and K. Wang (2019). “Group lasso regularized deep learning for cancer prognosis from multi-omics and clinical features”. In: Genes 10.3, p. 240. Xie, Y. and Z. Yu (Dec. 2021). “Mixture cure rate models with neural network estimated nonparametric components”. en. In: Computational Statistics 36.4, pp. 2467–2489. issn: 0943-4062, 1613-9658. doi: Yin, Q., W. Chen, C. Zhang, and Z. Wei (2022). “A convolutional neural network model for survival prediction based on prognosis-related cascaded Wx feature selection”. In: Laboratory Investigation 102.10, pp. 1064– Yousefi, S., F. Amrollahi, M. Amgad, C. Dong, J. E. Lewis, C. Song, D. A. Gutman, S. H. Halani, J. E. Velazquez Vega, D. J. Brat, et al. (2017). “Predicting clinical outcomes from large scale cancer genomic profiles with deep survival models”. In: Scientific reports 7.1, p. 11707. Yu, C.-N., R. Greiner, H.-C. Lin, and V. Baracos (2011). “Learning patient-specific cancer survival distri- butions as a sequence of dependent regressors”. In: Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. NIPS’11. Granada, Spain: Curran Associates Inc., pp. 1845– Zhang, J. and K. Huang (2014). “Normalized imqcm: An algorithm for detecting weak quasi-cliques in weighted graph with applications in gene co-expression module discovery in cancers”. In: Cancer infor- Zhang, Y., E. M. Lobo-Mueller, P. Karanicolas, S. Gallinger, M. A. Haider, and F. Khalvati (2020). “CNN- based survival model for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma in medical imaging”. In: BMC medical imaging Zhang, Y., G. Wong, G. Mann, S. Muller, and J. Y. Yang (2022). “SurvBenchmark: comprehensive bench- marking study of survival analysis methods using both omics data and clinical data”. In: GigaScience Zhao, L., Q. Dong, C. Luo, Y. Wu, D. Bu, X. Qi, Y. Luo, and Y. Zhao (2021). “DeepOmix: A scalable and interpretable multi-omics deep learning framework and application in cancer survival analysis”. In: Computational and structural biotechnology journal 19, pp. 2719–2725. Zhao, L. and D. Feng (Aug. 2019). “DNNSurv: Deep Neural Networks for Survival Analysis Using Pseudo Values”. In: arXiv:1908.02337 [cs, stat]. arXiv: 1908.02337 version: 1. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/ 1908.02337 (visited on 03/20/2021). Zhu, X., J. Yao, and J. Huang (Dec. 2016). “Deep convolutional neural network for survival analysis with pathological images”. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM). Shenzhen, China: IEEE, pp. 544–547. isbn: 978-1-5090-1611-2. doi: 10.1109/BIBM.2016. 7822579. url: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7822579/ (visited on 11/30/2021).

---NEW PAPER---

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights Into the Emerging Decentralized AARON M. GREEN, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, United States MICHAEL P. GIANNATTASIO, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, United States JOHN S. ERICKSON, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, United States OSHANI SENEVIRATNE, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, United States KRISTIN P. BENNETT, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, United States Open Access Support provided by: Published: 18 March 2024 Online AM: 08 January 2024 Accepted: 07 December 2023 Revised: 05 November 2023 Received: 17 January 2023 Citation in BibTeX format Distributed Ledger Technologies: Research and Practice, Volume 3, Issue 1 (March 2024)

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights Into the Emerging Decentralized AARON M. GREEN, MICHAEL P. GIANNATTASIO, JOHN S. ERICKSON, OSHANI SENEVI- RATNE, and KRISTIN P. BENNETT, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA We propose a survival analysis approach for discovering and characterizing user behavior and risks for lending protocols in decentralized finance (DeFi). We demonstrate how to gather and prepare DeFi transaction data for survival analysis. We illustrate our approach using transactions in Aave, one of the largest lending protocols. We develop a DeFi survival analysis pipeline that first prepares transaction data for survival analysis through the selection of different index events (or trans- actions) and associated outcome events. Then we apply survival analysis statistical and visualization methods modified for competing risks when appropriate, such as Kaplan–Meier survival curves, cumulative incidence functions, Cox hazard re- gression, and Fine-Gray models for sub-distribution hazards to gain insights into usage patterns and risks within the protocol. We show how, by varying the index and outcome events as well as covariates, we can use DeFi survival analysis to answer questions like “How does loan size affect the repayment schedule of the loan?”; “How does loan size affect the likelihood that an account gets liquidated?”; “How does user behavior vary between Aave markets?”; “How has user behavior in Aave varied from quarter to quarter?” The proposed DeFi survival analysis can easily be generalized to other DeFi lending protocols. By defining appropriate index and outcome events, DeFi survival analysis can be applied to any cryptocurrency protocol with CCS Concepts: • Mathematics of computing →Mathematical analysis; • Applied computing →Electronic Additional Key Words and Phrases: Decentralized finance, aave, survival analysis, competing risks, financial technologies, fintech, economics, data analytics Aaron M. Green, Michael P. Giannattasio, John S. Erickson, Oshani Seneviratne, and Kristin P. Bennett. 2024. DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights Into the Emerging Decentralized Financial Ecosystem. Distrib. Ledger Technol. 3, 1, Article 4 (March 2024), The rise in popularity of Bitcoin in the last decade has brought with it the novel study of blockchain technologies in both academic and industrial environments. An accompanying new financial ecosystem has started to emerge, called Decentralized Finance (DeFi). Built using smart contracts (code deployed onto blockchains), the infancy of this novel financial market has seen developers attempting to recreate the functions of traditional, centralized The authors acknowledge the support from NSF IUCRC CRAFT center research grant (CRAFT Grant #22003) for this research. The opinions expressed in this publication do not necessarily represent the views of NSF IUCRC CRAFT. This work was supported by the Rensselaer Institute for Data Exploration and Applications (IDEA). Authors’ address: A. M. Green, M. P. Giannattasio, J. S. Erickson, O. Seneviratne, and K. P. Bennett, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 110 8th St, Troy, New York 12180; e-mails: {greena12, giannm, erickj4, senevo, bennek}@rpi.edu. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions © 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

A. M. Green et al. financial services in a decentralized way. Banking has been remade into lending protocols, currency exchanges have been recreated as decentralized exchanges, and so on. Each DeFi protocol comes with its own set of novelties, attempting to innovate on traditional financial infrastructure in a unique way. As DeFi grows and matures, creating tools that help track and interpret changes in the DeFi ecosystem should prove interesting and useful, as the richness and volume of data publicly available in DeFi is unprecedented. We propose survival analysis tools which help address two big-picture questions about DeFi: “How are users behaving within DeFi protocols?” and “How are user-level behaviors within DeFi protocols changing through time?” For this work, we demonstrate our approach on Aave, one of the largest lending protocols [4]1. Our general survival analysis approach, however, can be readily generalized to the many existing and new DeFi protocols. Aave [4] has a market size of over $8.14 billion as of November 1, 2022, and is deployed on seven different networks, including Ethereum, Polygon, and Avalanche, to name a few. Lending protocols serve a similar role in DeFi to banks in traditional finance; they allow users to deposit cryptocurrencies into a lending pool, granting them interest on their deposited assets. Users can withdraw the deposits as desired. Users can also borrow funds from the lending pool so long as they provide sufficient collateral for the asset type and quantity they seek to borrow. Users can repay loans or keep them as long as desired as long as they maintain sufficient collateral. Should the value of their collateral drop too much or they allow too much interest to accrue on their loans, their account is at risk of being liquidated. Liquidations in Aave are one of the methods implemented by the developers to allow for the maintenance of the health of the lending pool. The protocol is configured to pay out a small bonus to any user (called a keeper) who is willing to repay another user’s unhealthy loan balance in exchange for the collateral. When the keeper repays a liquidatee’s loan, they receive the appropriate proportion of the liquidatee’s collateral (their deposited assets), and also receive a small, percentage-based reward from Aave in order to incentivize liquidation. Since these transactions are the building blocks of DeFi data streams, we applied a method of data-driven time- to-event analysis called “survival analysis” to the transactions streams. Survival analysis in the context of DeFi proves a versatile technique for derivation of myriad insights into macro-level user behaviors and how these behaviors have changed through time. We show here just a few of the many compelling results from applying survival analysis methods to Aave’s transactions. This article is organized as follows: in the methods section, we describe the source and structure of Aave data used, the survival analysis methods employed, and an overview of the application created in conjunction with this article. In the results section, we demonstrate the use provided by survival analysis to answer various questions. We conclude with a discussion of the contributions of this work and promising directions for future work. The data used for this analysis is from The Graph2. Aave pushes its own data to The Graph, and each network Aave is deployed on has its own subgraph. These subgraphs are structured identically, at least with respect to the transaction-level data with which our analyses are concerned. We have collected all of the transaction data from nine subgraphs maintained by Aave, which include the data from the following Aave markets: Ethereum [6] (both Mainnet and Automated Market Maker versions), Polygon [15], Avalanche [30], Optimism [37], Harmony [34], Fantom [7], and Arbitrum [16]. There are currently two versions of Aave in deployment, referred to simply as V2 [5] and V3 [11] (V1 went by a different name and is, for all intents and purposes, no longer in use). The Ethereum markets only operate on AaveV2, the Polygon and Avalanche markets have both AaveV2 and AaveV3 versions in deployment, and the rest are exclusive to AaveV3. We illustrate survival analyses of a single market Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights Into the Emerging Decentralized Financial Ecosystem Table 1. Summary of Transaction Types from Aave’s Ethereum Market Collected from November 30, 2020 to October 01, 2022 Providing the Average Values of Each Transaction Type Note that for liquidation transactions there are two currencies involved: the principal currency that the keeper is paying back to Aave, and the collateral currency that the keeper is receiving from the liquidatee’s account. Table 2. Snapshot of Transaction-Level Data from Aave’s Ethereum Market that was Used as the Dataset for this Analysis Dec. 1, 2020 05:15:00 Dec. 1, 2020 05:15:30 Sept. 30, 2022 23:50:00 Sept. 30, 2022 23:50:45 and across different markets. Since, the various Aave markets come with the advantages and disadvantages of the networks (blockchains) on which they are deployed, examining differences in user behaviors across markets can naturally lead to interesting insights regarding how user behaviors change across markets. The data used here includes all transactions made on Aave’s V2 deployment on the Ethereum blockchain from its creation on November 30, 2020 through October 1, 2022. The majority of the analyses presented in this article focus solely on the Aave Ethereum market. This is for a few reasons: Aave is still fairly new, and the Ethereum market is the oldest of the deployments and, thus, its data spans the longest duration; the value locked on the Ethereum market is, as of November 1, 2022, approximately $6.16 billion, accounting for nearly 75% of the value locked across all of Aave’s markets; and the number of transactions from this market comprises only roughly 5% of the total transactions across all markets combined, which makes computation of its associated survival data easier to test. For the data used in this article, we include five transaction types from Aave: deposits, withdraws, borrows, repays, and liquidations. There are some other transaction types that Aave collects, but they vary from market to market and the quantity of these transactions are so low that we do not feel they are important for the sake of this analysis; e.g., swaps (a user swapping from stable to variable borrow rates, or vice versa) comprise just 3,382 transactions out of the 1,475,175 in Aave’s Ethereum market, and is not tracked in other markets. A summary of the data used from the Ethereum market is given in Table 1. Descriptions of each transaction type are provided in Section 2.1.1 below, and Table 2 shows a sample of the raw transaction data. Note that Aave allows the usage of 92 different coins across all markets. For insightful analysis, we divide the coins into two types: stablecoins and non-stablecoins. A stablecoin is from a class of cryptocurrencies that attempts to offer price stability, typically in terms of USD. The other types of coins in the dataset are non- stablecoins. A breakdown of the coins available in Aave’s Ethereum market and whether they are classified as stable or non-stable can be found in Appendix B. There are 11 different stablecoins in the Aave’s Ethereum market, and 28 other coins which we call non-stable. Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

A. M. Green et al. Transaction Type Descriptions. The most fundamental transaction type in Aave is the “deposit”. Like opening a savings account with a bank, deposited assets will slowly accrue interest, providing users some incen- tive to use the platform even passively. Naturally, users can withdraw their deposited assets from the protocol using the “withdraw” transaction type. An important characteristic of an account in Aave is how much collateral a user has posted. When a user deposits a currency into Aave, in most cases, they are able to select whether they want that currency to be used as collateral in their account (certain currencies are disallowed as collateral by Aave). Having one or more assets enabled as collateral in an account will allow a user to “borrow” assets from the Aave lending pool. The amount of cryptocurrency a user wants to borrow is capped by a percentage of the total value of the assets they have enabled as collateral in their account. These assets are all valued relative to their conversion rate with the Ethereum cryptocurrency. When a loan has been taken out through a borrow transaction, the user can “repay” the loan over time. The most complex transaction type in Aave is the “liquidation.” When someone borrows funds in Aave, they borrow them against the value of their collateral assets. As the loan accrues interest, and as the values of the collateral and borrowed currencies fluctuate with the market, a loan that was originally healthy can become unhealthy. If the health of a user’s account (calculated using the relative value of the user’s collateral assets and borrowed assets) deteriorates too much, the user’s account can be liquidated. This means another user (called a keeper) is allowed to pay off a portion of the unhealthy loan and claim the appropriate portion of the user’s collateral, and gain a small bonus from the Aave protocol for having done so. Liquidations are an important method for keeping the protocol healthy overall, since they provide an incentive for someone to repay a loan that was otherwise losing value for the lending pool. Creating Survival Analysis Data Survival analysis is a collection of statistical procedures for data analysis in which the variable of interest is the time from an index event until the outcome event [9]. Basically, survival analysis allows for time-to-event analy- sis. There are four primary choices to make when using survival analysis: an “index event,” an “outcome event,” a “covariate” of interest, and an “observation period.” Index events trigger the beginning of a single observation. After some time has elapsed following an index event, an outcome event may occur. Outcome events trigger the end of an observation that began with an associated index event and the appropriate elapsed time is calculated. It is possible as well that the period of observation ends prior to the occurrence of an outcome event for a specific index event. In this case, the event is considered to be “right-censored,” and a note of this censoring is made. The elapsed time is the time between the index event and the end of the observation period. The survival data will be segmented by each possible value of the chosen covariate, allowing us to see the effects the covariate has on the outcomes. Also, in some cases there are multiple kinds of transactions competing to cause the same outcome. When relevant, we keep track of what event/transaction type caused the outcome in order to account As an example, consider the question “How long do users take to repay stablecoins versus non-stablecoins after a borrow?” We can use survival analysis to answer this question by choosing borrow transactions as index events, repay transactions of the same coin (i.e., the principal reserve coin) as outcome events, the coin type (stable or nonstable) as the covariate, and an observation period of interest. For the sake of this example, let the observation period be the time from Aave’s inception until the end of our data collection (Oct. 1, 2022). From these choices, the survival-style data we need to create will look like Table 3. Survival analysis with respect to covariates can allows us to address different questions. Covariates can be any factor associated with an index event. For instance, in the example in Table 3, we added the covariates such as which currency was borrowed (i.e., coin), or whether the currency is a stablecoin (i.e., coin type.) New covariates can easily be defined and added as desired to achieve analysis goals. Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights Into the Emerging Decentralized Financial Ecosystem Table 3. Sample Survival-Style Data with Index Events being Borrows and Outcome Events being Repayments, with Additional Covariates Computing Survival Data with Different Observation Periods. The choice of observation period allows for additional versatility in what questions we can answer with survival analysis, and brings with it slightly different steps for computing the survival data. For the work presented here, we use two different observation periods. The default observation period we use is since inception. For survival data computed since inception, we consider data from the start of Aave through the end of our collected data (October 1, 2022). This observation period only requires consideration of right-censored events, where the index event is observed but no outcome event is observed. In this case, we mark that an index event occurred and that a duration from the time of the index event until the end of the observation period has passed, but that the event is censored. Unless otherwise specified, this is the observation period used in our analysis. In Section 3.4, we change how we handle the observation period to quarterly. Instead of having just one observation period for the entire history of Aave, we break the data into quarterly observation periods (01-Jan through 31-Mar, 01-Apr through 30-Jun, 01-Jul through 30-Sep, and 01-Oct through 31-Dec). We only include quarters that we have complete data for, which includes 2021 Q1 through 2022 Q3. We treat each quarter as a separate observation period, which means that it is possible for an outcome event to occur with no associated index event having taken place in the observation period. This leads to “left-censored” events. If an outcome event occurs, say, 30 days after the start of the observation period and it was not preceded by an associated index event, we record in the survival data that an observation occurred with 30 days of elapsed time, and that the event was censored. Our primary method for visualizing survival analysis is with Kaplan–Meier survival curves [17]. To quantify the characteristics of the survival data we use a couple of different metrics: the hazard ratios (HR) [10] with corresponding p-values; and the restricted mean survival time (RMST) [28]. In cases where multiple event types compete to cause one outcome, we follow standard practices for presenting competing risk analyses. We use the Cumulative Incidence Function (CIF) to visualize competing risks. We also compare the cause-specific hazard ratios (CSHR) from multi-state Cox models with the sub-distribution hazard ratios (SDHR) from the Fine and Gray model to more accurately compare the effects that competing risks have on an outcome. We briefly explain how to read and interpret these below. To create the Kaplan–Meier curves, compute the RMST, and calculate the hazard ratios, we employ the survminer package [18] and the survival package [35, 36] in R [26]. For Kaplan–Meier curves we use the ggsurvplot function from survminer package. To compute the RMSTs we use the survival package’s survmean function. For calculating the (cause-specific) hazard ratios (and p-values), we use the coxph function from the survminer package. For plotting CIFs, we use the ggcuminc function from the tidycmprsk package [33]. We use the the crr function from the same package for creating the Fine and Gray models and calculating the SDHRs. Kaplan–Meier Survival Curves. Kaplan–Meier curves show the probability of the outcome event having not yet occurred after an increasing amount of time has elapsed. Interpreting a Kaplan–Meier curve requires the Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

A. M. Green et al. Fig. 1. Kaplan–Meier plot using borrows as index events, the full repayment of the borrow as outcome events, and the loan size quartile as a covariate. understanding of three main components: the index and outcome events used to create the underlying survival data, and the covariate selected as a strata. Numerous Kaplan–Meier plots can be created from the same survival data based on which covariate is selected for the strata, and for each unique value of the selected covariate, a separate Kaplan–Meier curve will be drawn on the same plot. To read the Kaplan–Meier plots, then, we will use Figure 1 as an example. In Figure 1, the index events are “when a user borrows from Aave”, the outcome events are “when the balance of that user’s loan has been fully repaid”, and the covariate selected as the strata is the quartile of the amount in USD that was initially borrowed. Since we have segmented the amount borrowed into quartiles, there are four Kaplan–Meier curves included in this plot. The individual curves show how likely it is for the outcome event to have not yet occurred after time passes. In this example, if we focus on the red curve (1–25% of loans by size), we see that it takes nearly 150 days after a borrow has been made for the loan to have been repaid in full. Considering the curves for the other loan sizes, we see a clear gradient in how quickly loans are repaid based on how much was initially borrowed. The larger the loan was that a user took out, the faster they tend to repay The statistical significance of the difference between any Kaplan–Meier curves in a plot are calculated and given as a p-value using the log-rank test. The p-values have been included atop the figures, and due to the magnitude of data present in the creation of these plots, these p-values tend to be very small. If the p-value is less than 1e −16, then we round it to 0. Lastly, each Kaplan–Meier curve is plotted with a 95% confidence interval included. Similar to the p-values rounding to 0, the confidence intervals tend to be so closely fit to the curves themselves that they often are not visible, but nonetheless they are included in each Kaplan–Meier curve drawn. Cox Proportional Hazards Regression. The Cox proportional-hazards model [10] is a model for quan- tifying the effects of covariates on the survival time of events. For a categorical covariate, Cox regression will use one of the values of that covariate as a reference point against which to compare the likelihood of survival through time. We compute and give the hazard ratios for the non-reference values of the covariates. Hazard ratios that are greater than 1 indicate that the value of the covariate “reduces survival likelihood” (the outcome Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights Into the Emerging Decentralized Financial Ecosystem event is more likely to occur) relative to the reference. Hazard ratios less than 1 indicate the value of the covariate “increases survival time” (the outcome is less likely to occur). We also give the p-value provided for each Hazard Ratio to indicate the statistical significance of these results. The p-values are computed by a Wald test [38]. Restricted Mean Survival Times. We use the restricted mean survival time to calculate the mean survival time for types of events stratified by covariates across the entire observation period. For instance, in Table 6, we calculate the RMST of borrow-to-full-repay survival data stratified by loan size. For the smallest loans (1st Quartile) the RMST is 225.08 days, meaning that over the course of the entire observation period the average time it took for the smallest loans to be repaid was 225.08 days. Likewise, for the largest loans the RMST is significantly lower at 45.81 days. When competing risks are involved, we still report the RMST, treating separate causes as censoring. In this context, the RMST indicates the mean time until the event of interest without the occurrence of competing risks. Competing Risks Analysis. In certain cases, the application of pure survival analysis can lead to incom- plete or deceptive results due to multiple types of events competing as possible outcomes for the same index event. These are called “competing risks”, and arise when the occurrence of one event type precludes the occur- The standard method for analyzing competing risks data involves presenting both the “cause specific hazard ratios” (CSHR) and the “subdistribution hazard ratios” (SDHR) for a particular analysis. The CSHR is just the hazard ratio from the Cox model, quantifying a user’s immediate risk of experiencing a specific outcome type. The SDHR is computed via the Fine and Gray model [12]. This model generalizes the Cox proportional-hazards model to accommodate competing risks. The SDHR quantifies the effect of covariates on the marginal probability of the event occurring, considering the presence of competing risks. The difference between the two hazard ratios is subtle. CSHRs show what happens to those who are still at risk for the event, whereas SDHRs tell you about the cumulative incidence in the whole population. Using both ratios can help confirm the robustness of our findings. To perform this analysis, we first convert the boolean “Censored?” column to instead store the specific out- come event (i.e., liquidation, repay, censor). This data is then used to create the respective Fine and Gray Model and to plot the CIFs. Interpreting CIFs is similar to interpreting Kaplan–Meier curves, but the curves are inverted. Considering Figure 2, there are four CIFs plotted here. Each curve represents the likelihood over time that the out- come in question has taken place. The legend tells us what proportion of the events were using stable coins and non-stable coins, as well as what proportion of the total borrow events experienced each type of outcome. Note that the outcome percentages do not sum to 100%. This is because of censored events not experiencing either out- come. In the accompanying table (Table 5), we give the percentage of the combination of covariate and outcome. Insights Into User Behavior After Depositing Currency We show that survival analysis can provide a useful picture of how users behave after depositing money into their accounts. Deposits are the natural first transaction for a user to make in the Aave lending protocol, since before borrowing they must deposit collateral. Thus, looking at how users behave after making deposits seems a natural place to begin our analysis. Using deposits as index events and the first subsequent transaction of any type as outcome events, we get Figure 3. We are interested in what outcome events users are actually making, and so we must consider each transaction type as a competing risk. Therefore, we plot the CIFs for each transaction type. Since we are not factoring in any covariates to this analysis, there is no need to report any HRs. Of the 357,485 deposits, there were 28,058 that were not followed by another transaction and thus are not represented in this analysis. This analysis is not limited to users’ initial deposits, and thus it is possible for these deposits to be followed by events like repays. This would indicate that the account has had previous activity. Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

A. M. Green et al. Fig. 2. CIFs with borrows as index events, first repayments or first liquidations as competing outcome events, and using the coin type as a covariate. The red curves, which focus on borrows made with non-stable coins, are repaid faster and liquidated slower than borrows made with stable coins. Figure 3 provides us insights into what users are doing with their deposits. Users frequently make deposits and then immediately use them as collateral in borrows (36.52% of next transactions after a deposit are borrows). They tend to do so more quickly than any other transaction. However, based on the percentages of each outcome event, users are slightly more likely to make an additional deposit (37.61%) as their next transaction following a deposit fairly rapidly. Users depositing and then using the funds to repay loans occurs slightly less rapidly and are less common (6.40%). Deposits followed by withdraws occurs 18.58% of the time, but these tend to take much longer than the time to all other outcome types except liquidations. Unsurprisingly, since users have to borrow before making a liquidation, deposit-to-liquidations occur less frequently and tend to take the most time. We can use Table 4 to better understand this analysis. From the RMSTs, we see that when a user borrows after a deposit, the mean time to do so is only 2.18 days. This is the action that users are the fastest to make by a significant margin. The next fastest action is making another deposit, for which the mean time to make is 6.89 days. Users are also more quick to make repayments after deposits than they are to withdraw their deposits. This seems intuitive enough, since a user will need to make a deposit of whatever currency they had borrowed in the past in order to repay it. The HRs and significant p-values further support these conclusions. Insights Into Loans and Their Outcomes Next we consider user behavior with respect to loans. Enabling users to take out loans without the need for explicit approval by another party is one of the more unique features of DeFi lending protocols. A user is able to borrow currency based on two factors: the amount of other currencies they have deposited into the lending pool; and which of their deposits they are willing to post as collateral for their loan. This smart-contract enabled lend- ing is interesting, because it has no direct analog in traditional banking and also because the reasons for which someone would take out a loan in this setting are not immediately obvious. The requisite over-collateralization for loans makes motivation for loans less obvious, since the ability to take out a loan requires prior ownership of a relatively greater amount of crypto-assets in the first place. One possible motivation for borrowing assets Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights Into the Emerging Decentralized Financial Ecosystem Fig. 3. CIFs for deposits as index events, any subsequent transaction as an outcome event, and separated by the type of outcome event. Legend includes percentage of each transaction type after deposit. Table 4. Deposit-to-Next-Transaction: Quantifiers of the Survival Data Corresponding to Figure 3 Using Deposits as Index Events and Next Transaction as Outcome Events, with Each Transaction Type being a in this way could be as a way to short a cryptocurrency while holding onto one or more assets that you believe will maintain or increase in value. Since the allowance of lending is the primary reason for lending protocols to exist, we feel that emphasizing behavior related to loans and their outcomes is the most natural and interesting place for survival analysis. In Aave, loans are indefinite until some combination of two potential outcomes occur: repayment of the loan and liquidation of the account. Loans can be repaid in as many or as few repay transactions as the debtor desires, and there is no required timeline to pay back loans; the loan can last for as long as the user’s account remains healthy. If the user’s account becomes unhealthy, they can be liquidated. When a user is getting liquidated, the keeper can choose one of the unhealthy user’s collateral coins and one of their principal reserve coins and pay off up to 50% of that principal coin the user has borrowed in order to claim an equal proportion of the collateral coin. The liquidator is paid a small bonus by Aave to incentivize this action. This is the other way that a loan can be partially repaid. Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

A. M. Green et al. Table 5. Quantifiers of the Survival Data Corresponding to Figure 2, Using Borrows as Index Events, Repays or Liquidations as Outcome Events, and the Coin Type as Covariates In either case, we will be using borrow transactions as index events and either repay transactions or liquida- tion transactions as the outcome events. We use competing risk analysis for some of these analyses, since both liquidations and repay transactions serve as ways to partially repay a loan. We note, however, that while these methods of repayment are competing, they are not mutually exclusive. It is possible for a loan to be partially repaid by the borrower, and to still be the subject of a liquidation event in the future. Likewise, it is possible for a loan to be partially liquidated and for the remaining balance to still be repaid by the borrower at a future time. Note that these outcome events only mark the first repayment or the first liquidation following the borrow, not the time for the loan to be fully repaid or fully liquidated. How does Coin Type Affect the Outcomes of Loans? One covariate we hypothesize to have a significant effect on how users behave with their loans is whether the loan is of a stable or non-stable coin. We compute survival data using borrows as index events and either repays as outcome events, using the coin type as covariates (Figure 2). For repayments, we see users repaying non-stable coins significantly quicker than stable coins. From Table 5, we get that the RMST for repaying non-stable coins is 58.73 days, which is just about half as long as the RMST for repaying stable coins (117.97 days). In contrast, non-stable coins are liquidated much less frequently than stable coins. The mean time it takes for stablecoin loans to be liquidated is 496.17 days, which is almost 100 days sooner than the mean time of 585.79 days for non-stablecoin loans. From the CSHR and SDHRs, we see that borrowing a stable coin significantly reduces the incidence of repayments while simultaneously increasing the How does Loan Size Affect the Length of Loans? Next, we examine the effect of loan size on the time it takes for users to pay off the loan. In Aave, loans do not have defined lengths, the collateral and loan principal are typically in different coins, and the interest rates can vary drastically throughout the course of a loan if the borrower chooses to use variable-rate interest. Loans can be paid back incrementally through repay transactions or through liquidations. This analysis considers how long it takes for a loan to be repaid entirely, regardless of whether the loan was partially liquidated. As stated earlier, the reasons why someone would take out an over- collateralized loan in DeFi are not completely clear. In traditional finance, someone might take out a loan to buy a house, slowly paying back the loan over time, but it seems unlikely that many people are using these loans for that purpose. Even if they were, we would not have lengthy enough data to know that the loan had been paid back. Also, in traditional finance, we might expect to see shorter-term loans by businesses for the sake of corporate restructuring. These loans could be much larger than what one person might take out for a mortgage, and could be repaid much more quickly. Of course, there are plenty of other reasons a person or business might take out a loan as well. The hope is that we can use survival analysis to present a clear pattern in loan repayment times in Aave in order to glean some insight into how these loans might be being used. Fortunately, a clear pattern is exactly what we see. In Aave’s history, the larger a loan is, the faster the loan is likely to be fully repaid. We see this result in Figure 1, and the fact that the differences are significant is clearly shown by the large separation between the curves. The p-value for the log-rank test confirms this significance. In Table 6, we give the RMST and HRs for the different quartiles of loan amounts. The smallest quarter of loans have a mean survival time of 225.08 days, meaning that users are averaging over 225 days to fully repay the Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights Into the Emerging Decentralized Financial Ecosystem Table 6. Borrow-to-Full-Repayment: Quantifiers of the Survival Data Corresponding to Figure 1, Using Borrows as Index Events, Full Loan Repayments as Outcomes, and Loan Size as a Covariate Table 7. Borrow-to-Liquidation: Quantifiers of the Survival Data Corresponding to Figure 4, Using Borrows as Index Events, Account Liquidations as Outcomes, and the Combination of Principal and Collateral Coin Types as Covariates smallest loans in Aave. In contrast, the largest loans are being repaid in just 45.81 days on average. The HRs confirm that the larger a loan is, the higher the risk is for the loan to be fully repaid through time. How do Coin Types Influence Risk of Liquidation? We hypothesize that the combination of stable and non-stable coins of the principal reserve and the collateral may lead to further insight into the risk of borrows. As shown in Figure 4, we stratify the borrow-to-liquidation data by factoring in what collateral was purchased and what principal types were specifically paid off by a liquidator. Since we are splitting the curves by what principal and collateral were paid off and purchased at the time of the liquidation, all the curves do end up with a 0% probability of survival, similar to the curves in Figure 3. Again, though, we can still use the curves to gain insight into the relative riskiness of the principal:collateral combinations that people can have in their accounts. According to the log-rank test, the differences in the curves are statistically significant. The definition of the outcome event in this analysis is quite different. We aggregated user’s liquidation events to gain more information as to which coins the users have used as collateral in their account. Even though each liquidation transaction only records one principal type and one collateral type, sometimes a user will be the subject of multiple liquidations in quick succession, e.g., one user on October 30, 2021 was the subject of 82 liquidations in just over an hour. It would be inaccurate to consider these liquidations as separate events; they really are all part of one bigger liquidation event. Thus, in our transaction data, if a user is liquidated multiple times in quick succession (a 24 hour period) with no intermittent non-liquidation transactions, we aggregate them into one bigger liquidation transaction. The outcome event is the combined liquidation transaction, with the time being the first liquidation transaction. This lets us see whether there were multiple types of collateral and principal coins involved in the event. Thus, if a user has both stablecoins and non-stablecoins in their account as collateral, or if they’ve taken out loans of both stablecoins and non-stablecoins, we mark the collateral or principal, respectively, as “Mixed.” As such, the competing risks approach is not suited to this analysis, since the covariate of focus is not applicable to the outcome of repayment. Using the stable:stable combination of principal and collateral coins as the benchmark, we get the quantifica- tion of risk is seen in Table 7. Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

A. M. Green et al. Fig. 4. Kaplan–Meier survival curves using borrows as index events and liquidations as outcomes using different combina- tions of principal and collateral coin types as covariates. The results show that the combination of non-stablecoin principal with non-stablecoin collateral tends to be safer than that of stablecoin principal and collateral. This is a little surprising, since the relative value of an account’s principal and collateral are what causes its ability to be liquidated. When functioning properly, stablecoins should always have the same relative value and the only reason an account should liquidate with stablecoins as both the principal and the collateral would be when enough interest has accrued and gone unpaid on the account. Non-stablecoins’ values are much more volatile, and if the relative value of the principal coin is not in sync with the value of the collateral coin, the account could be liquidated much more quickly. However, this is not what we see. This likely indicates that users who borrow non-stablecoins using non-stablecoins as collateral are using collateral assets that are less likely to drop in value than their principal asset(s). We also see that loans are liquidated more quickly when they have non-stablecoin principal and stable collat- eral. This behavior makes sense logically during a bull market when many coins will be gaining value relative to the USD which most stablecoins are pegged to. If the value of the principal assets rise relative to the value of the collateral, the loan can become unhealthy very quickly. If an account consists of stablecoin principal and non-stablecoin collateral, we see a slight increase in risk relative to stable:stable accounts. This combination also accounts for the vast majority (90.79%) of liquidated accounts. Insights Into Differences Between Markets The analysis so far has focused on Aave’s Ethereum market. We now examine how user behavior compares in Aave’s other markets of AaveV3. The transaction volumes for the other markets are given in Appendix A. The six V3 markets were launched on March 12, 2022 and the data used here runs through October 01, 2022. Because we only have 203 days of data for the V3 markets, we restrict the time window when computing the RMSTs to the first 203 days of observation. In Table 8, we compute survival data using borrows as index events, liquidations as outcome events, and the Aave market as covariates. The RMSTs and HRs paint an interesting picture here. Using the Ethereum market as a benchmark, we see all but one of the V3 markets showing less risk of liquidation following a borrow. The Fantom Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights Into the Emerging Decentralized Financial Ecosystem Table 8. Borrow-to-Liquidation: Quantifiers of Survival Data using Borrows as Index Events, Liquidations as Outcome Events, and the Aave Market Where the Transactions Took Place as Covariates The RMSTs were computed with a cutoff of 203 days to account for the shorter span of data from the non-Ethereum markets. market, which accounts for just 1.87% of the borrow events in these transactions, has a RMST of 145.72 days. This indicates that in the first 203 days of these markets, the mean time it takes for a loan to be liquidated following a borrow is 23.02 days less than the mean time for borrows to be liquidated in the Ethereum market. In contrast, the other V3 markets show significantly longer times to liquidation. For instance, the Arbitrum market shows a mean survival time of 193.63 days, which is almost a 25 day increase over the Ethereum market’s survival time. In Table 9, we see a different side of the markets. Using deposits as index events, borrows as outcome events, and again using the Aave market as covariates, we can see how quickly users will borrow funds after making a deposit in Aave. In the Ethereum market, the mean time for users to borrow after a deposit is 85.76 days, and again, we see the biggest contrast in the Fantom market, where the mean time is only 44.55 days. The Polygon market, which is the market with the second-biggest share of deposits in this data at 23.76% of the deposits, also shows users being much more likely to borrow funds following a deposit. The mean survival time for the Polygon market is just 58.63 days. One factor that likely causes differences in user behavior across markets is the size of transaction fees in the market. The transaction fees are just flat fees, not scaled by transaction size, so in markets with higher transac- tion fees the use of smaller transactions is more heavily penalized. Additionally, making lots of transactions is more heavily penalized. While our data source does not tell us how much users paid in transaction fees, we do know that the Ethereum market has non-negligible fees, usually at least $10. The other most popular markets of Polygon and Optimism have very low transaction fees, usually costing less than $0.01. As a result, we sus- pect that these markets attract retail users who are looking to experiment more with the protocol and engage in behaviors such as yield farming to make shorter term profits, whereas the Ethereum market likely attracts much larger, institutional users. This would likely account for the large discrepancy between the value share of the Ethereum market, which stands at about 75%, and its share of the total number of transactions within Aave, which is only around 5%. Insights Into Evolving Behavior Since DeFi is still in its infancy, we would expect to see changes in macro-level user behaviors as people get excited about the new technology and start using it, but perhaps do not have a well-established understanding for how the technology should be used. In this section, we look at a couple of results of how user behaviors have changed from quarter to quarter. We again compute how long it takes for loans to see their first repayment after a user borrows money (Figure 5(a)), and we also look at behavior relating to how long users keep all their funds in their accounts (Figure 5(b)). Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

A. M. Green et al. Table 9. Deposit-to-Borrow: Quantifiers of Survival Data Using Deposits as Index Events, Borrows as Outcome Events, and the Aave Market Where the Transactions Took Place as Covariates The RMSTs were computed with a cutoff of 203 days to account for the shorter span of data from the non-Ethereum markets. In Figure 5(a), we look at Kaplan–Meier curves for borrow-to-first-repay events with quarters as covariates. Note that first-repay factors in the first outcome of either repayment or liquidation, so competing risks is not suited to this outcome event. Each distinct curve represents a different quarter of transactions. We note that, while the shapes of the curves are consistent from quarter to quarter, there are drastic differences between how quickly users are repaying loans depending on the quarter. For instance, we can see that in 2022 Q2, in the entire quarter only about 50% of the loans had their first repayment. This is in contrast to 2021 Q2 where over 75% of the loans saw their first repayment by the end of the quarter. The HRs for these curves are in Table 10, along with the average amount per borrow in each quarter. What we can observe from these coefficients is that the tendency through time has been for users to take longer to have their first repayment on their loans. 2021 Q2 showed a slightly increased risk of loans having their first repayment during the quarter, but the subsequent four quarters each show reduced likelihood of loans having their first repayment. This trend was broken in 2022 Q3, but the fact remains that users have been tending to slow down their repayment schedules as Aave has matured. Though not perfect, the average amount per borrow has followed a similar trend to first-repayment times, increasing steadily between 2021 Q1 and 2022 Q1, then decreasing drastically in the subsequent two quarters. This makes some logical sense with the increasing first-repayment times, as it stands to reason that larger loans on average would take more time to be fully repaid. However, this does contrast with the findings from 3.2.2 where we showed that larger loans have tended to be repaid more quickly, so a more in-depth analysis is required to fully understand the effects of loan size on their duration in Aave. In Figure 5(b), we change our focus to how long users are leaving money in their Aave accounts. As a result, the only possible events are redeem or continuing to leave the money (censored), so competing risks analysis is not applicable. We hypothesize that users who leave money in their accounts longer are more invested in both the protocol of Aave and in the emerging DeFi ecosystem, and thus, it is interesting to see how the duration that users keep money in their accounts has changed through time. Similar to the behavioral changes seen in Figure 5(a), the time it takes for users to withdraw funds after depositing them changes drastically from quarter to quarter. Generally speaking, users are leaving funds in their accounts much longer than the terms of loans, but the relative difference from quarter to quarter for how quickly users are withdrawing funds is significant. We see a similar trend in the deposit-to-withdraw analysis as in the borrow-to-repay analysis, where the first quarter in the data shows users being the most likely to withdraw funds from their accounts, and the general trend has been that as time has passed, the risk of users withdrawing funds has decreased. Again, these observations are confirmed by the hazard ratios in Table 11 along with the average amount per deposit in each quarter. Similarly to the average borrow values, the average deposit values per quarter increase steadily from 2021 Q1 through 2022 Q1, and then decline drastically through 2022 Q3. Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights Into the Emerging Decentralized Financial Ecosystem Fig. 5. Kaplan–Meier Survival Curves showing the differences in repayment schedules and withdrawal schedules throughout individual quarters since Aave V2 launched. 2020 Q4 has been removed due to the small portion of the quarter for which Aave existed (November 30-December 31, 2020). Table 10. Borrow-to-Repayment: Quantifiers of the Survival Data Corresponding to Figure 5(a), Using Borrows as Index Events, First Repayments as Outcome Events, and the Quarter in which the Events Took Place as Covariates This data was computed using each quarter as a separate observation period. The mean value (in USD) of borrows during each quarter has also been included. Table 11. Deposit-to-Withdraw: Quantifiers of the Survival Data Corresponding to Figure 5(b), Using Deposits as Index Events, First Withdraws as Outcome Events, and the Quarter in which the Events Took Place as Covariates This data was computed using each quarter as a separate observation period. The mean value (in USD) of deposits during each quarter has also been included. Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

A. M. Green et al. Survival Analysis App and GitHub Repository Since there are so many choices for index events, outcome events, and covariates, we thought it appropriate to help create these analyses and allow other people to explore our survival data. The app can be accessed at this link: https://inciteprojects.idea.rpi.edu/defitoolkit/app/defitoolkit/. This app allows the user to create Kaplan– Meier survival curves and tables of related data similar to what has been presented in this article. In addition to the app, the code used to create the analysis presented in this article can be found on GitHub3 along with some instructions to help acquire the necessary data to run the code (the datasets are far too large to be stored in a GitHub repository). We hope that anyone interested in this work can use the app and our code to further explore and expand on the insights we have shown in this article. Survival analysis as a tool in economic and financial analysis is growing in popularity, but is still largely over- shadowed by discriminant and logistic analyses. That said, there have been some significant articles applying survival analysis to financial questions. Some classic examples of questions to which survival analysis has been applied include questions related to bank failures [20], credit default risks [29] [14], and business failure predic- tion [13], to name a few. These articles demonstrate that survival analysis can be used effectively in financial theory and applications as a model for understanding and predicting events related to the financial wellbeing of businesses both small and large. Some work has tried to incorporate loan prepayments as competing risks with loan defaults, either in the context of mortgages [8], or more recently in the context of online loans [21]. The argument is that the end goal of providing someone with a loan is to accrue additional money through interest payments. Both loan prepayments and defaulting on the loan act as outcomes that cause less interest to be paid over the life of the loan. This is similar to our analysis in Section 3.2, but is not directly applicable to loan analysis in the DeFi space because liquidations and defaults operate differently, and because a loan in DeFi is constantly accruing interest, so the notion of making a “prepayment” before an interest payment is due does not make sense. However, there are still similarities in the analysis and the application of competing risks is necessary in both cases. A key feature of these survival-analysis studies is the kind of data to which they have access. For instance, in Ref. [13], a study is made that includes data from an 18-year span detailing 27 financial variables of 189 businesses during that span. These data are well-labeled and understood, and the data spans a long duration. This is in stark contrast to the data available in DeFi, where the transactions are all public, but the big picture of what might be happening with these transactions is unknown. Additionally, the time span that DeFi data can bridge right now is limited. There might be a lot of data, but it is all from a relatively short period of time. For this reason, we believe it is more appropriate to use survival analysis as an expository tool for user-level behavior in DeFi rather than as a predictive tool for how various entities in the DeFi space might perform. With an over-collateralized loan, a borrower must post collateral which exceeds the value of the debt. This way, collateralization simultaneously ensures that the lender (likely a smart contract) can recover their loaned value. The “health factor” (HF) is a custom threshold in DeFi lending systems. If the debt collateral falls below the HF (typically below 1), the debt position may be opened for liquidation. Then, the liquidators can purchase the locked collateral at a discount and close the borrower’s debt position. Thus, leveraged positions are subject to liquidation when the debt becomes unhealthy, and a liquidator can repay the debt and benefit from a liquidation spread. Given this novel form of automatic lending, a growing body of literature has studied liquidations on bor- rowing and lending platforms in DeFi. Qin et al. [25] have analyzed risk management provided by liquidators, acting on the protocol’s user accounts. They have measured various risks that liquidation participants are ex- posed to on four major Ethereum lending pools (i.e., MakerDAO [22], Aave, Compound [27], and dYdX [1]) and Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights Into the Emerging Decentralized Financial Ecosystem quantified the instabilities of existing lending protocols. They have illustrated that the commonly used incentive mechanisms tend to favor liquidators over borrowers, causing the problem of so-called over-liquidation, leading to unnecessary high losses for borrowers. The only recourse the borrowers have to avoid such liquidations is to monitor their loan-to-value ratio when the market changes quickly because even a random drop in market prices can result in a cascade of liquidations. If there are any drops in the market, it can lead to self-accelerating pressure to sell, which further causes more problems for a blockchain-based DeFi, such as network congestion that leads to steep gas costs. We witnessed such an event in the Ethereum market collapse of March 13, 20204 that left some borrowers unable to react, despite imminent liquidations. It can be particularly bad for borrowers who get liquidated if market prices recover after a dip again, leaving them deprived of subsequent upward price participation. In general, regardless of market conditions, liquidations in DeFi are widely practiced, and related works such as Qin et al. [25] have quantified that over the years 2020 and 2021, liquidators realized a financial profit of over 800M USD while performing liquidations. Stablecoins play a significant role in liquidations, as they have several characteristics that are directly tied to liquidation mechanics. For example, a user may take a loan with a stablecoin as collateral with the intent of holding the loan indefinitely. If the stablecoin collateral is accruing higher interest than the borrowed principal coin, this can lead to a form of passive income. Early empirical evidence on the stability of crypto-backed loans with stablecoins has been studied by Kozhan and Viswanath-Natraj [19]. They specifically focused on the price volatility in the MakerDao protocol, which introduced the world’s first decentralized stablecoin called Dai that is soft-pegged to the US Dollar, i.e., it uses a collateralized debt position mechanism to keep the price stable with respect to the US Dollar. They have analyzed how collateral stability increases peg stability and found a positive relationship between collateral risk and the price volatility of the stablecoin Dai. The efficiency of lending pool liquidations has been studied by Perez et al. [24], in which they introduced a lending pool state model that is instantiated with historical user transactions observable in the Compound5 im- plementation deployed on Ethereum. Their model abstraction facilitates the observation of state effects of each interaction and investigates the latency of user liquidations following the under-collateralization of borrowing accounts. Similarly, Bartoletti et al. [2] provide an abstract formal state transition model of lending pools and prove fundamental behavioral properties, which had previously only been presented informally in the litera- ture. Additionally, the authors examine attack vectors and risks, such as utilization attacks and interest-bearing Most of the related works approach the issue of liquidation at a conceptual level or rely on aggregate flow data. In contrast, our article uses transaction-level blockchain data to provide a more “microscopic” view of liquidations, combined with survival analysis techniques. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK This work defines a pipeline for survival analysis of DeFi lending protocols which includes data aggregation, cleaning, converting to a data abstraction model, and performing powerful survival statistical analyses and vi- sualizations to gain insights. Using Aave transaction data in the scenarios above, we have shown these survival analysis methods to be versatile tools for answering all kinds of questions in the DeFi sphere. The possibilities for what questions to ask and answer with survival analysis are myriad. What we have presented in the results here were limited to just a handful of selections for index and outcome events, and using a few different variables to stratify the results. We showed that, counter to basic intuition, DeFi loans tend to be repaid more quickly when the loan is larger. We have shown how the combinations of stable and non-stable coins as both principal and collateral assets affect the riskiness of an account ending up being liquidated. We have also applied considered loan repayments and liquidations as competing risks, applying competing risks Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

A. M. Green et al. analysis to more accurately understand the interactions between coin types and the different outcomes for loans in DeFi. Expanding the scope of the data briefly, we showed that depending on the Aave market, behaviors can change drastically. We hypothesize that these behavioral changes have mostly to do with the magnitude of the transaction fees in the market, and show that there are large differences in risk of liquidation over time between markets with high transaction fees and markets with low transaction fees. Lastly, we show that the data can be segmented into separate observation periods for each quarter, and that we can use these quarterly observation periods to find differences in user behavior through time. This work represents just a few steps in the usage of survival analysis techniques to help form a complete picture of behavioral trends in the DeFi ecosystem. We note that these DeFi survival analysis techniques could be generalized to other DeFi lending protocols. DeFi survival analysis can be applied to any cryptocurrency protocol with transactions. Hazard analysis and other types of survival analysis and visualization methods could be used as well. In some analyses, consideration of repeated events could provide additional insights into user behavior. For instance, in the process of repaying a loan, a user can make any number of repay transactions. They could repay it all at once, or they could repay it in small installments over a long period of time. There are some existing methods for handling repeated events, like multi-state models [23]. Furthermore, survival analysis models can be used to for making predictions, like in Ref. [21], where the competing risks models are used to predict how much profit will be made from specific loans. In addition to this article, we have also been preparing a toolkit for analysis of DeFi protocols through many different lenses. Survival analysis techniques are just one part of the toolkit, and eventually the results of these survival analysis applications will be integrated into other results to help form more robust analyses of DeFi protocols. This research only partially addresses the rich DeFi ecosystem, which has many interacting protocols and coin prices. We are already exploring the use of more advanced Artificial Intelligence (AI) methods for the analysis of transaction data developed for commerce and health [3, 32] that could incorporate more aspects of the DeFi ecosystem. These could be used for segmenting users and predicting behaviors and prices. Early results analyzing Aave transactions using Neural Temporal Point Processes are very promising [31]. DeFi represents an exciting new domain for AI research in transaction modeling since DeFi is a compelling use case, and all the datasets are public by definition. Moving forward, we plan to continue using the survival analysis methods to help with ongoing work identify- ing and quantifying characteristics of the emerging DeFi ecosystem. We are working towards solidifying some methods for clustering the users of DeFi protocols and explaining what kinds of users each cluster represents. When the clusters are completed we plan to add user cluster as an additional covariate in our survival analysis, and we hope to see big differences in behavior across clusters. To improve the results relating to differences in user behavior over time, we plan to quantify the “bullishness” of the market through time and try to identify different behavioral trends based on how bullish the market is at the time. We also hope to incorporate flash loan data into our analyses as soon as we can correlate users’ transactions between protocols, in order to get the true picture of how flash loans are being used. All of this analysis will eventually be incorporated into our open-source DeFi Toolkit.6 Currently, the toolkit allows for the dynamic creation of survival analysis plots like what have been presented here. As we continue to refine certain techniques, they will be added to the toolkit to make for a more robust application. TRANSACTION SUMMARIES BY MARKET In Section 2.1, we presented a table summarizing the transaction data that was used in this article from the Aave Ethereum market. Since the data from other markets was also used for parts in this article (e.g., Section 3.3), we Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights Into the Emerging Decentralized Financial Ecosystem feel some might be interested in seeing the data summaries from other Aave markets. These are included below, with the market name, Aave version, and date-range of data included in the caption for each table. Table 12. Summary of Transaction Types from Aave’s Avalanche V2 Market Collected from March 31, 2021 to October 01, 2022 Table 13. Summary of Transaction Types from Aave’s Polygon V2 Market Collected from March 31, 2021 to October 01, 2022 Table 14. Summary of Transaction Types from Aave’s Arbitrum V3 Market Collected from March 12, 2022 to October 01, 2022 Table 15. Summary of Transaction Types from Aave’s Avalanche V3 Market Collected from March 12, 2022 to October 01, 2022 Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

A. M. Green et al. Table 16. Summary of Transaction Types from Aave’s Fantom V3 Market Collected from March 12, 2022 to October 01, 2022 Table 17. Summary of Transaction Types from Aave’s Harmony V3 Market Collected from March 12, 2022 to October 01, 2022 Table 18. Summary of Transaction Types from Aave’s Optimism V3 Market Collected from March 12, 2022 to October 01, 2022 Table 19. Summary of Transaction Types from Aave’s Polygon V3 Market Collected from March 12, 2022 to October 01, 2022 Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights Into the Emerging Decentralized Financial Ecosystem COIN TYPES IN AAVE’S ETHEREUM MARKET Stable (Not pegged to USD) The authors acknowledge the support from NSF IUCRC CRAFT center research grant (CRAFT Grant #22003) for this research. The opinions expressed in this publication do not necessarily represent the views of NSF IUCRC Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

A. M. Green et al. CRAFT. This work was supported by the Rensselaer Institute for Data Exploration and Applications (IDEA)7. We would like to thank Leyi Lin and Shuyu Meng for helping create and interpret results related to this work. [1] Antonio Juliano. 2017. dYdX: A Standard for Decentralized Margin Trading and Derivatives. Technical Report. Retrieved from https: [2] Massimo Bartoletti, James Hsin-yu Chiang, and Alberto Lluch Lafuente. 2021. SoK: Lending pools in decentralized finance. In Interna- tional Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security. Springer, 553–578. [3] Kristin P. Bennett. 2019. Artificial intelligence for public health. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine [4] Boado, Ernesto. 2020. AAVE Protocol Whitepaper. Technical Report. Retrieved from https://www.cryptocompare.com/media/38553941/ [5] Boado, Ernesto. 2020. AAVE Protocol Whitepaper V2.0. Technical Report. Retrieved from https://cryptorating.eu/whitepapers/Aave/aave- [6] Vitalik Buterin. 2014. Ethereum: A Next-generation Smart Contract and Decentralized Application Platform. Retrieved from https://github. [7] Sang-Min Choi, Jiho Park, Quan Nguyen, and Andre Cronje. 2018. Fantom: A scalable framework for asynchronous distributed systems. [8] Brian Ciochetti, Yongheng Deng, Bin Gao, and Rui Yao. 2002. The termination of commercial mortgage contracts through prepayment and default: A proportional hazard approach with competing risks. Real Estate Economics 30, 4 (02 2002), 595–633. DOI:https://doi.org/ [9] Taane G. Clark, Michael J. Bradburn, Sharon B. Love, and Douglas G. Altman. 2003. Survival analysis part I: Basic concepts and first analyses. British Journal of Cancer 89, 2 (2003), 232–238. [10] D. R. Cox. 1972. Regression models and life-tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological) 34, 2 (1972), 187–220. [11] Emilio Frangella, Lasse Herskind. 2022. AAVE V3 Technical Paper. Technical Report. Retrieved from https://github.com/aave/aave-v3- [12] Jason P. Fine and Robert J. Gray. 1999. A proportional hazards model for the subdistribution of a competing risk. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 94, 446 (1999), 496–509. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1999.10474144 [13] Adrian Gepp and Kuldeep Kumar. 2008. The role of survival analysis in financial distress prediction. International Research Journal of Finance and Economics 16, 16 (2008), 13–34. [14] Dennis Glennon and Peter Nigro. 2005. Measuring the default risk of small business loans: A survival analysis approach. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37, 5 (2005), 923–947. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/3839153 [15] Anurag Arjun Jaynti Kanani, Sandeep Nailwal. 2020. Matic Network Whitepaper. Retrieved from https://github.com/maticnetwork/ [16] Harry A. Kalodner, Steven Goldfeder, Xiaoqi Chen, S. Matthew Weinberg, and Edward W. Felten. 2018. Arbitrum: Scalable, private smart contracts. In USENIX Security Symposium. [17] E. L. Kaplan and Paul Meier. 1958. Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 53, 282 (1958), 457– 481. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/2281868 [18] Alboukadel Kassambara, Marcin Kosinski, and Przemyslaw Biecek. 2021. survminer: Drawing Survival Curves using ’ggplot2’. Retrieved from https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=survminer R package version 0.4.9. [19] Roman Kozhan and Ganesh Viswanath-Natraj. 2021. Decentralized stablecoins and collateral risk. WBS Finance Group Research Paper, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3866975 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3866975 [20] William R. Lane, Stephen W. Looney, and James W. Wansley. 1986. An application of the cox proportional hazards model to bank failure. Journal of Banking and Finance 10, 4 (1986), 511–531. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4266(86)80003-6 [21] Zhiyong Li, Aimin Li, Anthony Bellotti, and Xiao Yao. 2023. The profitability of online loans: A competing risks analysis on default and prepayment. European Journal of Operational Research 306, 2 (2023), 968–985. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2022.08.013 [22] MakerDAO. 2017. The Maker Protocol: MakerDAO’s Multi-Collateral Dai (MCD) System. Technical Report. Retrieved from https:// [23] Luís Meira-Machado, Jacobo de Uña-Álvarez, Carmen Cadarso-Suárez, and Per K. Andersen. 2009. Multi-state models for the analysis of time-to-event data. Statistical Methods in Medical Research 18, 2 (2009), 195–222. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/0962280208092301. [24] Daniel Perez, Sam M. Werner, Jiahua Xu, and Benjamin Livshits. 2021. Liquidations: DeFi on a knife-edge. In International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security. Springer, 457–476. [25] Kaihua Qin, Liyi Zhou, Pablo Gamito, Philipp Jovanovic, and Arthur Gervais. 2021. An empirical study of defi liquidations: Incentives, risks, and instabilities. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM Internet Measurement Conference. 336–350. Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights Into the Emerging Decentralized Financial Ecosystem [26] R. Core Team. 2022. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. [27] Robert Leshner, Geoffrey Hayes. 2019. Compound: The Money Market Protocol. Technical Report. Retrieved from https://compound. [28] Patrick Royston and Mahesh K. B. Parmar. 2013. Restricted mean survival time: An alternative to the hazard ratio for the design and analysis of randomized trials with a time-to-event outcome. BMC Medical Research Methodology 13, 1 (Dec. 2013). DOI:https://doi.org/ [29] Michal Rychnovský. 2018. Survival analysis as a tool for better probability of default prediction. Acta Oeconomica Pragensia 2018, 1 [30] Kevin Sekniqi, Daniel Laine, Stephen Buttolph, and Emin Gün Sirer. 2020. Avalanche Platform. Retrieved from https://assets.website- [31] Xiao Shou, Tian Gao, Dharmashankar Subramanian, and Kristin P. Bennett. 2023. Multi-Label Event Prediction in Continuous Time. [32] Xiao Shou, Georgios Mavroudeas, Alexander New, Kofi Arhin, Jason N. Kuruzovich, Malik Magdon-Ismail, and Kristin P. Bennett. 2019. Supervised mixture models for population health. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM). [33] Daniel D. Sjoberg and Teng Fei. 2022. tidycmprsk: Competing Risks Estimation. Retrieved from https://CRAN.R-project.org/package= tidycmprsk R package version 0.2.0. [34] Harmony Team. 2020. Harmony Technical Whitepaper. Retrieved from https://harmony.one/whitepaper.pdf [35] Terry M. Therneau and Patricia M. Grambsch. 2000. Modeling Survival Data: Extending the Cox Model. Springer, New York. [36] Terry M. Therneau. 2022. A Package for Survival Analysis in R. Retrieved from https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=survival R package [37] Mark Tyneway. 2020. Optimism. Retrieved from https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism [38] Abraham Wald. 1943. Tests of statistical hypotheses concerning several parameters when the number of observations is large. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 54, 3 (1943), 426–482. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/1990256 Received 17 January 2023; revised 5 November 2023; accepted 7 December 2023 Distrib. Ledger Technol., Vol. 3, No. 1, Article 4. Publication date: March 2024.

---NEW PAPER---

Poor miners and empty e-wallets: Latin American experiences with cryptocurrencies , Eva van Roekel2, Peter Howson3, This article examines how cryptocurrencies are increasingly entangled with crises in Latin American political discourse and everyday economic life. In an effort of interdisciplinary integration, combining human geography with political economy and cultural anthropology, we critically assess the linkages between cryptocurrency, economic crisis and forms of political and economic precarity and exploitation. Drawing on experiences in Latin America, mostly on the cases of El Salvador and Venezuela, we explore how cryptocurrencies have rapidly emerged and expanded during periods of economic and political crises. We ground this discussion on social theories of money and critical analysis of blockchain and cryptocurrencies that question the apolitical assumptions of these apparent “trustless” infrastructures. The article contends that cryptocurrencies have the capacity to create potential niches for makeshift economic survival, speculation and quick proﬁt, while at the same time reproducing historical conditions of vulnerability, inequality and ‘crypto-colonialism’. Though cryptocurrencies are sur- rounded by stories of freedom and decentralised community control, our ethnographic data on El Salvador and Venezuela suggest they often rely on free market fundamentalism and conditions of political corruption by authoritarian state-backed cryptocurrency, bitcoin, Venezuela, El Salvador, crisis, crypto-colonialism Mineros pobres y billeteras electrónicas vacías: experiencias latinoamericanas con Este artículo examina cómo las criptomonedas están cada vez más enredadas con las crisis en el discurso político latinoamer- icano y la vida económica cotidiana. En un esfuerzo de integración interdisciplinaria, combinando la geografía humana con la economía política y la antropología cultural, evaluamos críticamente los vínculos entre las criptomonedas, la crisis económica y las formas de precariedad y explotación política y económica. Basándonos en experiencias en América Latina, principal- mente en los casos de El Salvador y Venezuela, exploramos cómo las criptomonedas han surgido y se han expandido rápidamente durante períodos de crisis económica y política. Basamos esta discusión en las teorías sociales del dinero y el análisis crítico de blockchain y las criptomonedas que cuestionan los supuestos apolíticos de estas aparentes infraestructuras “sin conﬁanza”. El artículo sostiene que las criptomonedas tienen la capacidad de crear nichos potenciales para la 1York University, Toronto, Canada 2Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands 3Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK 4Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands Peter Howson, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 8ST, UK. 2024, Vol. 17(1) 43–54 © The Author(s) 2023

supervivencia económica improvisada, la especulación y las ganancias rápidas, al mismo tiempo que reproducen condiciones históricas de vulnerabilidad, desigualdad y “criptocolonialismo”. Aunque las criptomonedas están rodeadas de historias de lib- ertad y control comunitario descentralizado, nuestros datos etnográﬁcos sobre El Salvador y Venezuela sugieren que a menudo se basan en el fundamentalismo del libre mercado y las condiciones de corrupción política de las élites autoritarias respaldadas por el estado. Criptomoneda, Bitcoin, Venezuela, El Salvador, Crypto-colonialism The linkages between crises and cryptocurrencies are clear. The collapse of well-known crypto exchanges such as FTX as well as a sharp fall in the price of popular cryptocurrencies, like bitcoin throughout 2022 and 2023 raises questions around the sustainability of an industry rooted in volatility and speculation. While interest in Bitcoin has ﬂatlined among traditional buyers in the Global North, rates of adop- tion are increasing in the Global South, in a process that Howson (2023) refers to as the market’s pivot to the poor. Salvador have declared Bitcoin as legal tender. Others, like Honduras, are encouraging the development of crypto charter cities. Nigeria and Puerto Rico have sold themselves as Special Economic Zones (SEZs) to attract crypto-investors. In Venezuela, an overall economic meltdown opened the back In October 2021, van Roekel arrived in Caracas for a short ﬁeld trip. She met a friend at the airport, whom we will call Guillermo. On our way to the city centre, he almost spouted all the latest news: the foul-smelling fuel, supposedly coming from Iran, was screwing his engine, the bolivar digital had started circulating 5 days ago – another new national cur- rency to get rid of yet another six digits due to the enduring hyperinﬂation. But no one really cared about the bolivar anymore, Guillermo said. He continued that all the new and fancy coffee bars that had recently opened were just for money laundry and the new bodegones (grocery stores) sold insanely expensive imported goods only for a very small segment of the Venezuelans. Guillermo shocked her with all his stories and latest happenings about the enduring economic crisis in Venezuela. He casually continued that he was considering jumping into the latest crypto boom now that bitcoin was legal tender in El Salvador. He was still in doubt if he would get in or not, although he had started some trading and was paying his employees at his software company stablecoins through e-wallets now. He used to pay them dollars in cash, he said. But he considered cash too vulgar – as if his employees were working clandestine, but they were ofﬁcially on his payroll. Some of them did some crypto mining on the side to earn some extra money. They called themselves sometimes jokingly los mineros pobres (the poor miners), because they could not compete with these big bitcoin miners. At one point, Guillermo sighed that they were changing everything the whole time. It was just too hard to keep up, he said. We were familiar with everyday life and academic debates on the practical workings and setbacks of economy and ﬁnance in the Global South (Bernards, 2022; Howson, 2020; Marcano, 2009). The extreme volatility of economic life in Venezuela was not what struck us. But it seemed at least surprising to see Guillermos’ investment considerations in cryptocurrencies and latest ﬁnancial adoptions towards e-ﬁnance despite his previous reluctance. In 2019, he had conﬁded in van Roekel that he wanted to stay as far away as possible from cryptocurrencies. But all the rumours of trickery and bribery seemed less of a problem anymore to Guillermo. The economic and monetary crisis had pushed him too towards crypto ﬁnance. In Venezuela, the mining and trade of cryptocurrencies emerged in tandem with the collapse of the economy, high levels of inﬂation and the erosion of the legal tender as medium of exchange. Beside de facto dollarisation, a rapid turn to cryptocurrencies in pol- icymaking and private investments by new elites has pro- vided ways to navigate the crisis. Cryptocurrency also proved beneﬁcial to circumvent economic sanctions imple- mented by the United States and EU to oust the increasingly authoritarian regime headed by Nicolás Maduro. The use of crumbling energy infrastructure, historically subsidised by a petro-state, served as a proﬁtable mechanism for bitcoin mining and trading to rapidly expand in a nominally socialist country, subject of sanctions, dysfunctional economic poli- cies, and widespread corruption. At a closer look, the story that Guillermo shared was somewhat common in a context of increasing volatility and crisis in many countries in In May 2022, Rosales arrived in El Salvador for a short ﬁeld trip to research the recent bitcoin policy in the country. Upon arrival, the airport was ﬁlled with bitcoin ATMs, some of which were labelled Chivo, the Salvadoran company in charge of rolling out the country’s bitcoin policy. After quick pleasantries, the taxi driver, Juan Carlos, began to share his knowledge of bitcoin and the gov- ernment’s policy initiative. Juan Carlos told the story of his celebrity-like encounter with the “ofﬁcial delegation” of Liberland, a self-proclaimed fantasy territory located on a mud ﬂat between Serbia and Croatia where anarcho- capitalists and conspiracy theorists plan to create a bitcoin- fuelled autonomous republic. Juan Carlos was proud to

explain how after the delegation’s trip, El Salvador had become the ﬁrst country to ofﬁcially recognise Liberland’s status as independent. The somewhat bizarre and unexpected connection between a small Central American country, foreign inﬂuencers, crypto-enthusiasts and an emerging polit- ical leader in Central America is part of a broader seismic movement in the nation’s political system that is connected with rising high-risk investments in the form of volatile spec- ulative assets such as bitcoin. In El Salvador, for several years, a deep crisis in its polit- ical system has seen the rise of a new populist leader, President Nayib Bukele, with authoritarian tendencies who claims to be wiping out a corrupt elite that increasingly undermines an already fragile democratic system. Among his disruptive policies is the declaration of bitcoin as legal unbanked’ and offering new channels for remittances. However, the policy appears part of a broader and deepening process of elite replacement and private embezzlement (Alvarado, 2021a, 2021b). This policy has been carried crypto-investors and enthusiasts who have little interest in the wellbeing of the Salvadoran constituents, but have ulti- mately ﬁnanced the president’s crypto dream. Recent scholarship has begun to explore how the intersec- tion of crisis and cryptocurrencies are expressed in the lived experiences and socio-political conﬁgurations of the Global South (Atiles, 2022; Crandall, 2019; Howson, 2020; Jutel, 2021). This article contributes to the broader discussions of political economy and lived experiences in Latin America to expose the interconnections of crisis and cryptocurrencies. We elaborate on our ﬁeldwork stemming from Venezuela and El Salvador to reﬂect upon broader developments and insights that connect crises and cryptocurrencies in Latin America. Our main argument centres on the capacity of cryp- tocurrency to simultaneously carve out new temporal niches for speculation and quick proﬁt, usually for state-connected elites and wealthier groups in low-income societies, while at the same time reproducing historical conditions of vulner- ability and inequality. In the long run, we see that mostly state-connected elites and wealthier groups are proﬁting from cryptocurrency in low-income societies. The historical development and legacy of colonial power structures, economic exploitation and the extraction of resources from formerly colonised regions continues to reverberate in ‘the state-ﬁnance nexus’ (Harvey, 2019) of Latin America and other regions. National currencies have been key in the symbolic construction of ﬂedgling nation- states (Helleiner, 2000; Mitchell, 2002) – in the same vein, the domination of the US dollar in many countries of the Global South is not to be understood as a form of economic prowess, but as emblematic of political and ideological sway. Moreover, in the complex of, as David Harvey (2019) calls them, deep relationships between states and capital, crypto- currencies are not exempt. In fact, we reveal how they might be envisioned and put to use as ‘a way out’, towards personal autonomy and subsistence, whilst they are simulta- neously part of state projects in gaining ﬁnancial indepen- dynamics are best understood by entwining interdisciplinary modes of analyses that account for the ﬁne-grained details of everyday life and experience, such as ethnography, as well as political-economic theories able to situate broader global The term ‘crypto-colonialism’ was coined before block- chains. Michael Herzfeld used it in reference to clandestine strategies used by the British to ensure newly ‘independent’ countries remained strongly dependent on their colonial master, mainly through unfair trade agreements and debt. Today’s crypto infrastructure – trading apps, software, mining and marketing – ‘gifted’ to poor countries is done with similar motives. Few job prospects are provided for the locals. No useful development projects are left behind. For most local people, all that’s bequeathed is a headache. Recently, a vibrant scholarly discussion has emerged around issues of ‘data colonialism’ and ‘imperialism’ (Jutel, 2021; Mumford et al., 2022). These discussions are tied to long lasting epistemic debates surrounding the lega- cies of structures of coloniality, both in terms of knowledge creation and socio-economic development. In this article, we examine how cryptocurrencies are becoming increasingly entangled with crises and deep-rooted economic exploitation in Latin American political discourse and everyday economic life. More speciﬁcally, we critically assess the linkages between cryptocurrency, economic crisis and new forms of political and economic dependency and exploitation. We draw on the cases of El Salvador and Venezuela. These cases are important for several reasons. While both countries have endorsed cryptocurrencies from the top down, with state policies supporting them, these gov- ernments differ ideologically. El Salvador’s leadership pro- motes a mix of right-wing populist and technocratic policies and has been denounced as going down a path of Vázquez, 2022). Venezuela has long been a left-wing leader in the so-called socialism of the 21st century, but due to the crisis and international sanctions has recently endorsed more pragmatic market-driven policies (Bull and Rosales, 2020b; Rosales, 2021a). Moreover, in both coun- tries mining and trading of cryptocurrency has mushroomed in recent years, while each country faced different economic epochs: Venezuela went through its severest economic crisis and El Salvador faced an apparent economic stability, while it has kept vast swaths of its population immersed in poverty The article builds on recent primary research carried out both in Venezuela and El Salvador and on multidisciplinary research that combines political economy, cultural anthropol- ogy and geography. Our research is qualitative in nature with a collaborative and mixed-method approach that includes

ethnographic methods and elite interviews. We draw on grounded theories of money and critical analysis of block- chain and cryptocurrencies that question the apolitical assumptions of these apparent ‘trustless’ infrastructures. We argue that cryptocurrencies have the capacity to create potential niches for economic survival, while at the same time reproducing conditions of vulnerability, inequality and neo-colonialism in the long run. Though cryptocurrencies are surrounded by discursive stories of freedom and decen- tralised community control, in practice they rely on free market fundamentalism, and can interestingly thrive by the hand of authoritarian state elites. Embedding cryptocurrencies in social and All cryptocurrencies use incentives and/or penalties, relying on ‘trustless’ systems of cryptography and a blockchain (Crandall, 2019). Using game theory logic, network stability is maintained through the self-interest of users rather than central planning. Following the global ﬁnancial crisis of 2008, an online community known as the cypherpunks devel- oped the ﬁrst Proof of Work consensus mechanism, pulling together existing ideas around block time-stamping, and simpli- ﬁed hash equations. The community incorporated a group of anarcho-capitalists and high-tech Hayekian entrepreneurs who politically were on different pages, but they equally embraced principles of cryptography and libertarian capitalism, whilst rejecting government planning. Cryptoeconomics is an embry- onic ﬁeld at present (Brekke and Alsindi, 2021), but the ﬁeld is often associated with the Austrian school of economics (Golumbia, 2016). The early developers of bitcoin were pre- dominantly made up of anarcho-capitalists inﬂuenced by the philosophy of Austrian economist Friedrich Hayek (Howson, 2023). While rejecting state involvement in monetary policy- making, the Hayekians believed that peace and social stability could only be achieved when free market competition and pricing were left unconstrained to enable ‘spontaneous order’. In The Road to Serfdom, Hayek (1944) argued that any govern- ment intervention in the autonomous functioning of free markets would be a slippery slope to totalitarian control and Despite crypto communities’ rejection of centralised inter- mediaries, enabling interests to become (in principle) more digitally decentralised, spatially, as these interests rely on favourable local governance regimes, including light-touch ﬁnancial and environmental regulation, they often become more geographically centralised, rather than more distributed (Howson, 2023). Histories of neo-colonialism, including impositions of neoliberal structural reforms, have placed many low-income countries at the frontier of cryptocurrency production (Crandall, 2019; Howson, 2020; Jutel, 2021). For example, Puerto Rico, a jurisdiction under direct colonial rule by the United States, has been subjected to policies of austerity imposed by unelected ofﬁcials and institutions and pushed to relax its tax framework to attract investors from the cryptocurrency industry. Economic instability, inad- equate tax policy and regulatory frameworks are also encour- aging increased levels of adoption in countries with the least resilience towards economic shocks (Howson and de Vries, Blockchain is always entangled with other technologies (e.g., internet protocols and physical infrastructures they rely on for energy and data transfers), politics (e.g. tax regu- lations in particular locations), and social and economic factors such as the existence of innovation hubs and fashion- able investments. While blockchain proponents often tout an a-political distributed system, the pragmatic realities of such networks are characterised by a multiplicity of centralised, decentralised and distributed aspects that manifest in differ- ent degrees of prominence in different situations, applica- Crisis commonly forms a core part of the bitcoin miner’s energy calculations. The industry thrives in vulnerable states (Leterrier, 2021), and communities in conﬂict (Russell and Hasan, 2022). Bitcoin miners have proved a reliable geo- graphical marker for fossil fuel-related hostilities for years. Similar to dental plaque disclosing tablets, bitcoin mining machines are gurgled around the global energy network, sticking in dark clumps to areas of industrial decline, endemic corruption, and social deprivation. Miners are attracted by state subsidised energy. But these subsidies are usually designed to reduce fuel poverty, rather than increase proﬁtability for bitcoin miners. Kitchin and Dodge (2011) argue the production of urban space is becoming increasingly dependent on code, while code is written to produce space. For them, this intertwining of software code and urban materiality creates complex man- ifestations of ‘code/space’ – where software creates new spa- tialities in everyday life. Where one’s spatial encounters are mediated by blockchain applications, records of actions can be stored immutably. Compliance and accountability are ensured through data transparency, or as Faria (2018) refers to it, a ‘distributed panopticon’. Therefore, within neoliberal economies with strong faith in markets as the purveyor of rational behaviour, where citizens are governed through market mechanisms, blockchain platforms enable a libertar- ian puritanism outsourced to code. The production of crypto- space leverages people’s trust in digital technology. Many blockchain proponents hold the techno-solutionist sentiment that digital technology itself is our true destiny, and anyone asking for time to pause and reﬂect, regulate or inﬂuence the shaping of these developments are backwards-thinkers, “those able to rise to the challenge are the champions of the coming millennium. The rest are fated to languish in the dust” (Winner, 1997: 2). Speed is of the utmost importance – act quickly or get left behind. This is antithetical to the work of

many feminist and grassroots organisations, whose local place- based knowledges are cultivated over generations. Despite these attempts at accelerating the pace of an apparently predetermined apolitical future, cryptocurrencies are deeply rooted in contexts of political and economic fric- tion. Therefore, any attempt at a theory of markets and of money is a theory of society, inevitably incorporating other spheres of social life such as politics, religion and technol- ogy. This is true for the ceremonial Kula system of exchange in Papua New Guinea of the early 20th century (Malinowski, 1922), the Tiv economy in northern Nigeria (Bohannan and Bohannan, 1968), household economics in the United States (Zelizer, 1994) and the encroachment of global ﬁnan- cial markets in all spheres of social life (Ho, 2009; Zaloom, 2006). It is true, as well, for cryptocurrencies, as the latest iteration of money with global aspirations and scope. Yet cryptocurrency’s universalising scale and apparent use of ‘neutral’ technology, side-lining central banks and state control – a depiction adopted by enthusiasts, criticasters and analysts alike – obfuscates situated analyses of these blockchain applications as they are woven into the fabric of political and social life, interacting with local histories, struc- tures of value and projections of the future. To be sure, ‘man’s economy is submerged’, Karl Polanyi (1968: 65) asserts, ‘in his social relations’. As such, we aim to stress the importance of localising analyses of developments in cryptocurrency (see e.g. Lee, 2022). By directing our gaze to the particularities of the Latin American context, three The cases in our article highlight the complicated entan- glement of cryptocurrency adoption, usage and imaginaries with state projects, business interests, and community needs – notably during times of political and economic crisis. In her ethnography of Occupy Wall Street, Hannah Appel (2014) refers to ‘economic imaginations’. These are “the possibilities and alternatives, foreclosures and deferrals through which we have come, unevenly, to understand capi- talism in the present moment” (Appel, 2014: 602–603). For cryptocurrencies, this means that understandings and prac- tices are in no way uniform, but instead rife with paradoxes and ironies. What becomes evident in both El Salvador and Venezuela, albeit in quite different ways, is how the eco- nomic imaginary of crypto, speciﬁcally projections of auton- omy and freedom from centralised control, is actively leveraged by national governments as a part of their political economic agenda. Such questions of authority in relation to crypto are worth pursuing, particularly because crypto is easily black-boxed, or veiled, behind the cloud of its technol- ogy – and consequently neutralised from any political inter- ests and values (Seaver, 2017). Yet alternative currencies such as crypto do not operate in a political and regulatory void, and the actual management of money is key to under- standing its effects (Kanters, 2022). A situated analysis of cryptocurrencies also opens space to pluralism: what values are being served with which type of currency, and might different types of currency circulate alongside each other to service different needs and values within society (Graeber, 2001; Guyer, 2004)? Designed to be a peer-to-peer electronic cash system, bitcoin’s principal goal was to eliminate the need for government interference in the free-movement of value. Yet what emerges, paradoxi- cally, in the ﬁnancial landscapes of El Salvador and Venezuela are what James and Koch (2020) call ‘economies of advice’: brokers and consultancy ﬁrms in the private sector that work to inform citizens and guide them into crypto mining or trading practices. These sites can provide key insights into the incentives, purposes and ideals that differen- tiate bitcoin from other available currencies. For communities and individuals, it is apparent how cryp- tocurrencies form a response to crisis. In times of economic stress or when formal institutions prove to be inadequate, the hegemony of a national economic space falters as alterna- tive economic formations gain more prominence and visibil- ity (Castells et al., 2014; Hann and Hart, 2011; North, 2007). The rise of alternatives to conventional money is historically counter-cyclical. As much as bitcoin is interwoven in the national economic space of El Salvador and Venezuela, it is simultaneously understood as a tool to overcome the crises integral to precisely this political and economic space. Capitalist critique tends to be implicit in discussions of cryptocurrencies; the lens of crisis and extractivism pre- cisely brings this capitalist teleology of growth and imperial- ism into clear view. As such, it becomes possible to scrutinise its situated effects. Crisis – a structural condition under cap- italism – is central too to the life of crypto. The same can be Chivo wallet: Financial inclusion as façade for appropriation of public funds The president of El Salvador, Nayib Bukele, declared bitcoin a legal tender in June of 2021. Bukele used the super- majority that his Nuevas Ideas party holds in parliament to make a swift change to a cornerstone of the country’s cur- rency system. El Salvador has been a dollarized economy for over two decades, in what was suspected to be a policy that would further link El Salvador to the US economy and one that would beneﬁt its ﬁnancial and export-oriented elites. Bukele’s announcement about bitcoin, however, was made in English, broadcast from a bitcoin convention in (Vázquez, 2022). He was accompanied by Jack Mallers, a Salvador’s “bitcoin beach” in El Zonte, a crypto-utopian project ﬁnanced by a bitcoin angel investor in connection with local charity organisations. Mallers helped scale up the initiative in El Zonte, which later became a laboratory for Bukele’s policy nationwide (Fieser, 2021).

Being a dollarized economy with reasonably stable inﬂa- tion rates, politicians and citizens in El Salvador clearly had different incentives than those in Venezuela, as we shall see later, to embrace bitcoin. Discursively, Bukele’s decision was justiﬁed as a policy that sought to promote ﬁnancial inclusion, enhance development via new technological investments, and attract remittances from the diaspora. But declaring bitcoin legal tender includes broader aspirations and discursive overtones. State ofﬁcials promote potential developmental objectives in tandem with encouraging an innovative and anti-imperialist leadership, capable of stand- ing up to international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the United States, and the possibility of advancing technical solutions to people’s quotidian prob- lems. The ideas of technological innovation for development and ﬁnancial inclusion refer to what Vázquez (2022) has labelled a ‘technical ﬁx’ to social problems through a ﬁxed set of mechanisms that are distanced from the population’s needs and that are also ﬁxed in the sense of granting beneﬁts to a premeditated sector of society. Against the backdrop of a disruptive discourse and the apparent desire to expand ﬁnan- cial networks to the nation’s poorest, the bitcoin policies of El Salvador reveal broader authoritarian transformations in the country (Meléndez-Sánchez, 2021), and the use of public ofﬁce to beneﬁt private interests. While dollarisation connects El Salvador with broader regional and global ﬁnancial circuits, most Salvadorans remain absent from the banking sector. According to ofﬁcial statistics, <30% of people in El Salvador have a formal bank account, the percentage is lower in poorer sectors and among women (Presidencia de El Salvador, 2022). Structural condi- tions make it difﬁcult to close the gap between the banked Salvador’s ﬁntech and a critic of the government’s bitcoin policy, explained in an interview that the reason for the coun- try’s considerable portion of unbanked people resides in their ‘lack of disposable income’. For Gómez, “the main problem is that people don’t have money to deposit in a bank account; if they live on a day-to-day basis, a bank account doesn’t make sense” (interview with an author). The other major social promise of the bitcoin law is that using bitcoin to capture remittance ﬂows to El Salvador would cheapen and Government ofﬁcials emphasise the importance of offering Salvadorans an alternative, inexpensive mechanism to send remittances to families at home. Migrant workers in the United States often pay hefty fees to send modest amounts to their relatives back in El Salvador. Thus far, the adoption of bitcoin for remittance has not been signiﬁcant; the volume of remittances sent through the Chivo Wallet remains a small portion of the total ﬂow, surrounding 3%t. The regulations imposed by the Securities and Exchange Commission in the United States for cryptocurrency transactions oblige the storage of legal ID to create a wallet, something that many irregular migrants would be hesitant to do. In this case, most continue to rely on expensive and predatory services offered by Western Union and similar exchanges. The bulk of the bitcoin policy in El Salvador has been carried out by the Chivo wallet. The government initially requested a $200 million US credit to Parliament to ﬁnance the creation of a national wallet, through which a $30 US incentive would be given to every Salvadoran citizen who downloaded the app. A trust fund of $150 million US was created to allow automatic convertibility between bitcoin and dollars by those purchasing and exchanging funds between the two. Another portion of those funds went into measure, as well as funding public awareness and education about the technology. Some 200 Chivo ATMs have been placed throughout the country, as well as in Salvadoran con- sulates in the United States. Over $100 million US have been also invested in purchases of bitcoin by the president. Even though the company Chivo was created by the gov- ernment with state funds, it is considered and treated as a private company (Alvarado, 2021a). According to liberal member of parliaments Johnny Wright Sol, the governance structure of Chivo Wallet reminds Salvadorans of historical tendencies of corruption in the country. Wright Sol argues “the electric sector has been a focal point of corruption in the Salvadoran state”. He explained that “after the 1990s and the neoliberal reforms and policies of privatization of public enterprises, the electric sector was partially privatized, but power generation remains under the state control” (by Comisión Ejecutiva Hidroeléctrica del Rio Lempa, CEL). In that sense, Wright Sol argues, “this sector continues to be the cash cow of the state, after every administration. There has always been theft of public funds that originate in power generation”. Through Chivo Wallet, the govern- ment is able to use a public utility to create private wealth. Chivo’s board of directors has been appointed directly by the government and it has many close associates of the pres- ident. The enterprise has been operating as a ﬁnancial institu- tion, but it is not treated as such (under the scrutiny of banking oversight institutions). Instead, it is protected by state secrecy. The strategic ambiguity – conveniently private and yet funded by public funds and managed by asso- ciates of the government – connects with a history of state-sponsored theft that usually engages the power- generation state company, CEL. The main concerns that arise from this ambiguity relate to potential channelling of public funds for the beneﬁt of a private clique, close to the president. Members of the company’s board have been part- ners in business and political deals of Bukele’s that date back to his time as Mayor of Nuevo Cuscatlán, outside of San Some technical issues associated with the Chivo app raise concerns to independent observers and institutions in and outside El Salvador. Its release was reportedly rushed, and there have been countless breaches in its system. Different fraud schemes were initially set up to steal individuals’

personal ID information, and thousands of accounts (contain- ing mainly the $30 US incentive) were emptied that way. Other elaborate schemes spread, in which people gave their information to apparent ﬁnancial operatives, often with the promise of a signiﬁcant and fast return that was never ful- ﬁlled. By and large, however, Salvadorans downloaded the app and immediately used the $30 US incentive for daily consumption needs. As Marroquin explains, “the large retail companies beneﬁted the most from this investment, as the majority of people used their bonus for groceries and other essentials”. Government ofﬁcials state frequently that the government is determined to investigate and solve these cases of fraud. There is, however, no reliable information about those cases and the extent of the theft perpetrated. Based on informal conversations with regular people who trusted the Chivo wallet and attempted to make bitcoin investments, fraud was a recurrent theme, where working class Salvadorans had been lured by offers of great returns for their modest investments, to later ﬁnd themselves robbed of their savings. In these interactions, similar notions of trust and distrust emerge: trust in traditional ﬁnan- cial institutions is difﬁcult to ﬁnd, and the possibility of earning great returns through an unconventional and disrup- tive technology appear as both a temptation and hope. Similarly, while many people may be aware of the power- grabbing intentions of the president, they are also willing to bet on his disruptive image, due to their deep distrust in traditional political parties and institutions who have disap- pointed them in the past. Bukele and his associates, in turn, prey on these sentiments to ﬁnd legitimacy in diverting public funds to a risky investment. The question of convertibility contributes to a further set of political and technical problems. The company Athena, which had originally been a contractor for the government in the deployment of the bitcoin policy, explained some concerning features of the Chivo wallet in its prospectus to the SEC of the United States. In this document, Athena attests that Salvadorans who convert bitcoin back to dollars may not be fully guaranteed their funds, but some form of stable coin tokens, something that goes against Salvadoran law and can be a source of profound instability in a dollarized economy. The document states that “when Salvadorans convert their Bitcoin to dollars, they do not receive dollars in the digital wallet. Instead, they become holders of stable-dollar coins, which are only a claim to real dollars”. The document continues: “At that point, Salvadorans hold an asset backed by the full faith and credit of Mr Bukele’s government” (SEC, 2022: 59). This has raised concerns by critical observers who have claimed that Bukele may be trying to use Chivo to monetise the govern- ment’s deﬁcit and cast doubts about the sustainability of dollar- Economist Oscar Cabrera, former head of the Salvadoran Central Bank furthermore explained that “the government took advantage of a grey area of governance to create a company through CEL and derive government funds to a private enterprise which creates great risks for the country’s ﬁnancial system”. The reason for this is that “Chivo wallet is not regulated by the Central Bank or the Superintendence of the Financial System”. Furthermore, Chivo is “taking on responsibilities that the constitution only grants to the Central Bank such as disposing of the nation’s reserves” (quotes from interview with an author). Granting convertibil- ity is a function of the Chivo wallet that is crucial for the stability of the ﬁnancial system in El Salvador, as the equiv- alent amount of bitcoin must appear in the stock equivalent of the central bank in US dollars. Cabrera remembers that in 2015, a telephone company was offering services like an e-wallet and was capturing deposits, which goes against the banking law in El Salvador: “the Central Bank decided to impose this company a legal banking reserve of 100 percent and this is what companies dealing with bitcoin cur- rently must adhere to in order to avoid making inorganic money”. Unfortunately, according to Cabrera, Chivo is being shielded by banking secret, without formally operating Government ofﬁcials, however, deny any attempt to decouple El Salvador from the US dollar through bitcoin. At any rate, the possibility that a bitcoin enthusiast head of state may use bitcoin as a platform to issue national money questions the ediﬁce upon which bitcoin has been discur- sively built and that is rooted on metallistic dogmatism and anti-inﬂationary monetary scarcity. Moreover, the use of Chivo wallet as a private enterprise created from state institu- tions and with public funds contributes to questions of legal- ity and the power of elites to proﬁt from the capture of state institutions. Deep in these seismic changes are regular Salvadorans whose trust in a disruptive political leader has been the collateral for a risky investment in a volatile asset, using state funds. President Bukele has been successful at diverting millions of dollars from state coffers to a quasi- private betting game due in large part to the crisis of a polit- ical system that had historically abandoned regular citizens and whose trust has been eroded. Poor miners: The lures of crypto subsistence and blockchain ‘egalitarianism’ For some time now, various crypto adoption indexes have ranked Venezuela third as the country that has reached one of the highest rates of cryptocurrency usage in the world (Goschenko, 2021). It is said that in 2021 Venezuela pro- duced a total of 28.300 million dollars in cryptocurrency transactions and witnessed an increase of more than 50% in the adoption of cryptocurrencies in comparison with the pre- vious year in the country (Maldonado, 2022). Beside a sheer monetary ﬂight into dollars and a sharp increase of barter in recent years due to the protracted economic crisis, aside from recent policymaking to implement and regulate crypto

cryptocurrencies to navigate the economic meltdown in their country with inﬂation rates of more than six digits. The crisis has pushed Venezuelans towards new uncertain ﬁnancial transactions such as cryptocurrency. Due to its very cheap energy and the government’s enthusi- asm to circumvent the economic sanctions implemented by the United States and EU, in recent years the Venezuelan govern- ment has proved quite adaptable to the mining and trading of cryptocurrencies. In 2019, the government issued a decree Superintendence of Cryptocurrencies (SUNACRIP) to regulate the creation, issuance, organisation, operation and use of cryp- tocurrencies and related activities. An important incentive for crypto mining (both public and private) in Venezuela has its roots in a frail electric generation system providing energy almost for free. The energy system in the country – powered mostly by hydroelectric sources – has long been underinvested and poorly maintained, and many new infrastructural projects have been left idle due to mind boggling corruption schemes. Despite this fragility, the country maintains unsustainable subsi- dies in energy as part of a long ‘petro-state’ tradition to promote industrial development and satisfy local demands via the nation’s energy wealth (Rosales, 2021b). Aside from ‘tradi- tional’ cheap energy, for some Venezuelan citizens, cryptocur- rencies have been a window of opportunity or need to evade multiple economic restrictions (Guerrero, 2022). Bitcoin mining and trading has spread in a context of economic col- lapse, where abandoned apartments due to the largest migration wave in the Western Hemisphere have become makeshift centres of operation for informal economic activity. A country whose GDP has shrunk over 80% in 7 years (Bull and Rosales, 2020a), Venezuela’s abandoned industrial capacity due to state negligence, mismanagement and brain drain has allowed some space for power use in alternative activities, even when deteriorated public services make electricity genera- tion and other utilities less reliable. It is thus of no surprise that the crypto hype was quite palpable in the streets, ofﬁces, and homes in Caracas in 2021. It is now estimated that around 3000 shops in Caracas accept crypto currencies as payment method (Listas, 2021) and around 100,000 Venezuelans are mining for cryptos (Swissinfo, 2017). These numbers are largely based on unreliable estimates as ofﬁcial data is absent since 2015 and existing statistics are largely based on guess- work. What is more of interest here is how Venezuelans them- selves cognatize, employ, and give meaning to ad hoc crypto mining and trading during protracted economic and monetary In 2021, the ﬁrst Bitcoin Café in Venezuela opened its doors. The manager, a Venezuelan woman in her mid-ﬁfties, said that they combined coffee with educational services about crypto economies and digital technologies. She explained that their target group was mainly middle-aged Venezuelans that were looking to diversify their storage of value and new investment opportunities but were largely inexperienced with blockchain technology and e-ﬁnance. The manager stressed that she was only active in trading. She had heard of big bitcoin mining farms outside of Caracas, but proﬁtable mining required more knowledge, she said. It was through this manager that van Roekel was able to participate in a ‘Martes de Emprendimiento’ (Tuesday of Entrepreneurship) by the Venezuelan represen- tative of a new cryptocurrency called Polkadot. The Polkadot representative was a hipster in his late forties, a Venezuelan ﬁne artist interested in blockchain. Although he claimed not to be evangelical about blockchain, he tried to lure everyone into a marvelous world of ‘decen- tralisation’ and ‘autonomy’. He also seemed keen to declare Latin America the continent of blockchain and crypto ﬁnance, because they simply had no stable currencies such as dollars or euros, and cryptocurrencies were a viable way to survive the crisis. ‘Necessity pushes crypto’, he said. The listeners were middle-aged men with little to no knowledge of the blockchain, but with some money to invest, just as the café manager had conﬁded earlier on. The representative’s discourse of survival and ad hoc solu- tion smoothly integrated with sparks of opportunism. “The blockchain is an opportunity, yet only 1% are taking In Venezuela it is hard to access big crypto mining farms due their close connections with political forces and inﬂuen- tial non-state actors that are not pleased by the prying eyes of researchers and journalists. Yet, despite many rumours, some information about the installation of big mining farms have leaked (Guerrero, 2022). Some companies have successfully set up mining machines in abandoned industrial warehouses across the country, and also the government claims to have set up different farms, including in Fuerte Tiuna, the largest military base in Caracas. Being interested in how the crypto boom in Venezuela evolved in less ‘spectacular’ ways, van Roekel instead met ‘ordinary’ mineros pobres, whom we call Leonardo and Alejandro, at Guillermo’s ofﬁce. Both were young tech savvy software engineers and Ethereum enthusiasts. They had started mining out of a mixture of curiosity and necessity. The rewards were only cucharillas (little spoons), Alejandro said. They had clearly not hit the jackpot (yet). Leonardo was the real chatterer of both. After a ﬁrst ten- tative talk about the marvels of Ethereum, he invited us to his modest mine at his parents’ house in the upper hills of Eastern Caracas, where many middle-class families live. Being an experienced software engineer, he was already quite handy with video cards, he said. To increase his modest salary in the speculative economy in Venezuela, in recent years he saw his chances and built four crypto Venezuelans interested in this growing digital extractive Mining requires knowledge after all. Cryptocurrency is also very much a knowledge-based economy whose consul- tancy activities are paid both in crypto or cash.

Leonardo explained that despite the notorious power cuts due to infrastructural failure, energy mismanagement and corruption, he considered the Venezuelan crisis – surpris- ingly – quite promising for crypto mining. Due to hyperinﬂa- tion and price controls on public utilities, eventually, energy became almost free of charge – for many small crypto miners in other countries high-energy prices are often a practical problem to make mining proﬁtable (Calvão, 2019). The empty houses of his siblings that had left the country over the years ﬂeeing from the crises became unexpectedly resourceful mining sites without raising too many suspicions about sudden increased energy consumption in the neigh- bourhood. It was hard not to confront Leonardo with the practical contradiction of engaging in a high-energy con- sumption activity in times when the national energy grid was chronically failing and an increased global awareness about the need for energy consumption reduction. Sitting next to his fabricated mine in his parents’ house, Leonardo reasoned that while being underemployed at his current employer and without any access to reliable credits in a country where the public educational system and healthcare did not work, the only thing he could take advantage of was cheap energy. “I don’t care how much energy it con- sumes or if it’s sustainable or not…While I still live in a world that does not work, I will continue, without greed… It may sound like a justiﬁcation, but it is not. [Crypto mining in Venezuela] is just part of the solution…” Leonardo’s candid answer seemed justiﬁable and unset- tling at once. He clearly wanted to distance himself from the image of the greedy crypto-miner using mining farms. To what extent do these smaller crypto mining and crypto trading operations foster any solution to Latin Americans, in this case Venezuelans, who are facing chronic monetary volatility and innumerable economic challenges and ﬁnancial restrictions due to national policies and international sanc- tions? These stories are more than just compelling individual case studies to colour up dramatic macroeconomic shifts arising from new technological developments in global ﬁnan- cial landscapes. They reveal how people are ambiguously pushed towards new uncertain ﬁnancial transactions with the hope for some extra income. They also reveal the dynam- ics of a long tradition of rentierism, where the state has tradi- tionally assured energy as a right to its citizens, even if done through subsidies that come at high costs and instead of other But these local accounts do not tell the whole story of the recent crypto boom in Venezuela. Neo-evangelical ideals of decentralisation and ﬁnancial autonomy are not so equally distributed as it may seem. A more elaborated report on a big crypto mining farm owned by the Coin Coin Group in Maracay nearby Caracas, for instance, shows how the Venezuelan state ventures into large private crypto mining businesses in Venezuela through clever association strategies between the government and businesspeople political con- nections: “All crypto businesses are equal, but some are more equal than others” (Guerrero, 2022). During a recent ﬁeld trip to Caracas in 2023, Leonardo’s Ethereum enthusi- asm had largely evaporated though. He conﬁded that he had stopped all of his crypto mining. His video cards had worn out and he had no spare money to invest in buying new ones to keep up with the competitive technological nature of mining for cryptocurrencies. The recent fall of bitcoin had also negatively affected the value of other cryp- tocurrencies, like Ethereum. At the same time, Leonardo was facing rising monthly energy rates as unexpectedly the subsidies from a cash-strapped government had rapidly declined in the ﬁrst quarter of 2023 (Reuters, 2023). And on top of all these material and ﬁnancial alterations, ‘poor miner’ Leonardo had also changed jobs. Unfortunately, his new employer had been involved in an unfolding large cor- ruption scheme related to cryptocurrencies and oil in Venezuela. In early 2023, the Venezuelan government dis- mantled the SUNACRIP, after the government revealed a corruption scheme that involved the head of the superintend- ency, Joselit Ramírez, in collusion with the national oil company, PDVSA. According to the government, in this scheme, state ofﬁcials had funnelled over 3 billion US dollars from oil sales done in cryptocurrency to bypass oil sanctions. The state embrace use of cryptocurrencies in Venezuela has been a tool not only to sidestep the obstacles of sanctions but a mechanism to funnel state funds for per- sonal wealth (García Cano and Goodman, 2023). Cryptocurrency expansion in Latin America: A regional laboratory Both Venezuela and El Salvador are prominent examples of the expansion and use of cryptocurrencies situated in crisis. Yet, they are not the only spaces of cryptocurrency expansion and experimentation in Latin America. While crypto markets have crashed signiﬁcantly in the Global North, economies in the Global South are growing in signiﬁcance as spaces for tokenising natural resources (Howson, 2023), charitable giving experiments (Howson, 2021), and offers of opportu- nity to rebuild ﬁnancial channels severed by sanctions and other infrastructural impediments (Campbell-Verduyn and Giumelli, 2022; Tankha, 2021). Questions of authority and monetary management – speciﬁcally the entanglement of public and private interests – are key in understanding devel- opments in cryptocurrencies in the Global South. As we have explained, both Venezuela and El Salvador show the complex linkages of powerful elites, who may use emerging ﬁnancial tools for economic and political goals, with social needs and economic opportunity. These linkages also include global ﬁnancial investors who often remain obscured in these stories but play pivotal roles. Such is the case in El Salvador, where a so-called angel investor helped kick start the experiment of El Zonte ‘bitcoin beach’, as a presumably ‘circular economy’ powered by bitcoin. After this experiment

was hailed by president Bukele as inspiration for his own bitcoin policy, similar projects have been launched in Central American towns linked to the tourism industry, such as the town of Panajachel in Guatemala’s Lake Atitlán and the town of Dominical in Costa Rica (Gándara, 2022; Grudgings, 2022). The intention of replicating the model of El Zonte and spreading it to other marginalised areas of Latin America represents an important focus of anal- ysis in the intersections of charity, tourism and potentially exploitative practices that ignore the needs of poor and racial- ized people (Robinson, 2020). Throughout the Global South, assumptions and expecta- tions of ‘blockchain egalitarianism’ continue to be exposed as an empty promise. Instead, what emerges are the stark con- tours of market-oriented dispossession. Critical scholars have successfully shown how dynamics of neo-colonialism have played out in Puerto Rico where unelected ofﬁcials and insti- tutions from the mainland United States have imposed auster- ity policies and incentivized changes in the archipelago’s legal framework to carve out exceptions and opportunities for crypto-investors to safeguard their wealth (Atiles, 2022). These changes have contributed to processes of dis- possession and gentriﬁcation, displacing local populations for the beneﬁt of vulture capital. Exacerbating existing inequalities at multiple scales, crypto-expansion in Puerto Rico by foreign elites has not addressed the country’s lacking infrastructure, including critical energy infrastructure after Hurricane María decimated the island (de Onís, 2018). In Venezuela, though the mineros pobres enthusiastically delve into ad hoc opportunities of this expanded monetary pluralism, they receive very little reward in the long run. Understood to circumvent the crises of the conventional monetary system, it effectively replicates them. Moreover, these crypto-opportunities often shift the linkages of exploi- tation of labour and nature from traditional practices of rent- ierism and resource extraction to ﬁnancialized instruments such as bitcoin mining. This article contributes to ongoing discussions on the role of cryptocurrencies in developing countries and their linkage with economic and political crises. It advances our under- standing through an effort in interdisciplinary integration. By weaving together ethnographic data, anthropological grounded theories on money and theories in political economy, we want to show how geographers can provide paint more comprehensive pictures concerning the economic processes related to cryptocurrencies on-the-ground as part and parcel of social relations, cultural practices, and power dynamics. As such, the article underscores how cryptocur- rencies emerge as makeshift opportunities for survival, as a tool for making quick proﬁts for elites, and for enhancing ﬁnancial connections severed by sanctions and other obsta- cles. At the same time, they are interwoven with processes of dispossession, fraud, and exploitation, often supported by state ofﬁcials and authoritarian or unelected governments. These connections ultimately reveal the uncomfortable intimacy between cryptos and the state, in which tools of apparent decentralisation and transparency turn into specula- tive mechanisms of concentration of wealth and opacity with lack of accountability. Such processes have on-the-ground consequences and deeply affect how people make decisions, both in making a living and making a life during turbulent Declaration of Conﬂicting Interests The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: Antulio Rosales received funding from the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada (Grant # 430-2022-00402). Eva van Roekel received funding from Independent Social Research Foundation and NWO-Veni for her research on the crisis on Alvarado J (2021a, September 8) Chivo Es Una Empresa Privada Financiada Con Fondos Públicos. El Faro. https://elfaro.net/ Alvarado J (2021b, October 28) Las Sombras de Alba Petróleos En Chivo. El Faro. https://elfaro.net/es/202110/el_salvador/25788 Appel H (2014) Occupy Wall Street and the economic imagination. Cultural Anthropology 29(4): 602–625. Atiles J (2022) Introduction: Decoding crypto-paradises: Fraud, crypto-colonialism, climate crisis, and dispossession in the global south. South Atlantic Quarterly 121(3): 594–599. Bernards N (2022) Colonial ﬁnancial infrastructures and Kenya’s uneven Fintech boom. Antipode 54(3): 708–728. Bisenov N and Tobin M (2022) “‘It’s a Mess’: How Crypto Mining Went from Boom to Bust in Kazakhstan.” Rest of World. https:// Bohannan P and Bohannan L (1968) Tiv Economy. Northwestern Brekke JK and Alsindi WZ (2021) Cryptoeconomics. Internet Policy Review 10(2): 1–8. Bull B and Rosales A (2020a) The crisis in Venezuela. European Europea de Estudios Latinoamericanos y del Caribe (109): 1–20. Bull B and Rosales A (2020b) Into the shadows: Sanctions, rentierism, and economic informalization in Venezuela. European Review of Latin American and Caribbean Studies (109): 107–133. DOI: Calvão F (2019) Crypto-miners: Digital labor and the power of blockchain technology. Economic Anthropology 6(1): 123–134.

Campbell-Verduyn M and Giumelli F (2022) Enrolling into exclu- sion: African blockchain and decolonial ambitions in an evolv- ing ﬁnance/security infrastructure. Journal of Cultural Economy Castells M, Caraça J and Cardoso G (2014) Aftermath: The Cultures of the Economic Crisis. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Crandall J (2019) Blockchains and the “chains of empire”: Contextualizing blockchain, cryptocurrency, and neoliberalism in Puerto Rico. Design and Culture 11(3): 279–300. de Onís CM (2018) Fueling and delinking from energy coloniality in Puerto Rico. Journal of Applied Communication Research Faria I (2018) Trust, reputation and ambiguous freedoms: Financial institutions and subversive libertarians navigating blockchain, markets, and regulation. Journal of Cultural Economy 12(2): Fieser E (2021, June 17) Bitcoin Beach: What Happened When an El Salvador Surf Town Went Full Crypto. Bloomberg. Gándara N (2022, March 25) Bitcoin Lake: Guatemala’s Crypto Enclave Launches. Bloomberg Línea. https://www. García Cano R and Goodman J (2023, March 31) Shadowy brokers walk off with billions in Venezuelan oil | AP News. AP News. Golumbia D (2016) The politics of Bitcoin. Minneapolis: University Goschenko S (2021, May 28) A Look Why Venezuela is the Third Country with the Most Crypto Adoption. Bitcoin.com. https:// Graeber D (2001) Toward an Anthropological Theory of Value: The False Coin of Our Own Dreams. New York: Palgrave. Grudgings S (2022, April 22) Bitcoin Beach Spawns A Fast-Growing Offshoot In Costa Rica—Bitcoin Jungle. Bitcoin Magazine - Bitcoin News, Articles and Expert Insights. https://bitcoinmagazine. Guerrero I (2022, June 26) Coincoin”, gruñen en la granja de criptomonedas de Maracay. ArmandoInfo. https://armando. Guyer J (2004) Marginal Gains: Monetary Transactions in Atlantic Africa. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Hann CM and Hart K (2011) Economic Anthropology : History, Ethnography, Critique. Cambridge: Polity Press. Harvey D (2019) Marx, Capital, and the Madness of Economic Reason. London: Proﬁle Books. Hayek F (1944) The Road to Serfdom. London: Routledge. Helleiner E (2000) Think globally, transact locally: Green political economy and the local currency movement. Global Society Ho K (2009) Liquidated: An Ethnography of Wall Street. Durham: Howson P (2020) Climate crises and crypto-colonialism: Conjuring value on the blockchain frontiers of the global south. Frontiers in Blockchain 3: 22. Howson P (2021) Crypto-giving and surveillance philanthropy: Exploring the trade-offs in blockchain innovation for nonproﬁts. Nonproﬁt Management & Leadership 31(4): 805–820. Howson P (2023) Let Them Eat Crypto: The Blockchain Scam That’s Ruining the World. London: Pluto Press. Howson P and de Vries A (2022) Preying on the poor? Opportunities and challenges for tackling the social and envi- ronmental threats of cryptocurrencies for vulnerable and low- income communities. Energy Research & Social Science 84: James D and Koch I (2020) Economies of advice. In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Anthropology. https://doi-org.proxy. Jutel O (2021) Blockchain imperialism in the Paciﬁc. Big Data & Kanters CL (2022) The business of cooperation: Efﬁciency in a Dutch alternative currency enterprise. Ethnos: 1–22. Kitchin R and Dodge M (2011) Code/Space: Software and Everyday Life. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Lee SC (2022) Magical capitalism, gambler subjects: South Korea’s bitcoin investment frenzy. Cultural Studies 36(1): 96–119. Leterrier R, 2021. Mise Sous Tension Électrique En Abkhazie “ De Facto “ et Haute-Svanétie : Les Impacts Géopolitiques. Master 2 Géopolitique. Université Paris 8. https://omeka.geopolitique. Listas J (2021, July 20) ¿Qué locales aceptan criptomonedas en Maldonado J (2022, May 11) ¿Por qué ha crecido la adopción de las criptomonedas en Venezuela? Bit2Me. https://news.bit2me.com/ Malinowski B (1922) Argonauts of the Western Paciﬁc. Warwick: Marcano LC (2009) From the neoliberal barrio to the socialist Commune. Human Geography 2(3): 75–88. Meléndez-Sánchez M (2021) Latin America erupts: Millennial authoritarianism in El Salvador. Journal of Democracy 32(3): Mitchell T (2002) Rule of Experts: Egypt, Techno-Politics, Modernity. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. Mumford D (2022) Data colonialism: Compelling and useful, but whither epistemes? Information, Communication & Society North P (2007) Money and Liberation: The Micropolitics of Alternative Currency Movements. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Polanyi K (1968) The semantics of money uses. In: Dalton G (ed) Primitive, Archaic and Modern Economies: Essays of Karl Polanyi. New York: Anchor Books, 175–203. Presidencia de El Salvador (2022) Política Nacional de Inclusión Financiera para El Salvador. https://www.bcr.gob.sv/bcrsite/ Rauda (2022, April 27) Athena: “Los salvadoreños reciben tokens, no dólares en su Chivo Wallet.” El Faro. https://elfaro.net/es/ Reuters (2023, May 15) Tarifas de luz y agua se disparan en Venezuela a medida que se reducen los subsidios.’ La Republica. https://www.

Robinson WI (2020) Don’t cry for me, Latin America. Human Rosales A (2021a) Cómo Maduro “liberalizó” la economía venezo- lana. Nueva Sociedad. https://www.nuso.org/articulo/como- Rosales A (2021b) Unveiling the power behind cryptocurrency mining in Venezuela: A fragile energy infrastructure and precarious labor. Energy Research & Social Science 79: Russell J and Hasan A (2022) “Crypto Miners and Crumbling Power Plants.” Rest of World. https://restofworld.org/2022/ lebanons-crypto-miners/ (December 20, 2022). Seaver N (2017) Algorithms as culture: Some tactics for the ethnography of algorithmic systems. Big Data & Society 4(2): SEC, United States Securities and Exchange Commission (2022) Athena Bitcoin global, Registration Statement under the Securities Act of 1933. https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/ Swissinfo (2017, October 19) Minar bitcoins, el peligroso escape de los venezolanos a la inﬂación, Swissinfo. https://www.swissinfo. Tankha M (2021) Detained settlements: The infrastructures and tempo- ralities of digital ﬁnancial transactions between the United States and Cuba. Economic Anthropology 8(1): 133–147. Vázquez E (2022) The technical ﬁx: Bitcoin in El Salvador. South Atlantic Quarterly 121(3): 600–611. Winner L (1997) Cyberlibertarian myths and the prospects for com- munity. ACM SIGCAS Computers and Society 27(3): 14–19. Zaloom C (2006) Out of the Pits: Traders and Technology from Chicago to London. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Zelizer V (1994) The Social Meaning of Money. New York: Antulio Rosales is an assistant professor in the Department of Social Science, Business and Society program at York University in Toronto, Canada. Eva van Roekel is an assistant professor at the Department of Social and Cultural Anthropology at Vrije Universiteit Peter Howson is an assistant professor in the Department of Geography and Environmental Sciences at Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. Coco Kanters is program director at the interdisciplinary Utrecht University, the Netherlands.

---NEW PAPER---

Citation: Kayani, Umar, and Fakhrul Cryptocurrency Impact on Financial Markets and Traditional Banking Systems: Lessons for Sustainable Collaborations. Journal of Risk and Financial Management 17: 58. Received: 20 December 2023 Revised: 9 January 2024 Accepted: 12 January 2024 Published: 1 February 2024 Copyright: © 2024 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https:// Unveiling Cryptocurrency Impact on Financial Markets and Traditional Banking Systems: Lessons for Sustainable Blockchain and Interdisciplinary Collaborations and Fakhrul Hasan 2,* College of Business, Al Ain University, Abu Dhabi 112612, United Arab Emirates; umar.kayani@aau.ac.ae Newcastle Business School, Northumbria University, Newcastle NE7 7XA, UK Abstract: The advent of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology has sparked a revolutionary shift in the financial sector. This study sets out on a wide-ranging investigation to understand the nuanced dynamics, repercussions, and potential future paths of this shifting environment in the UK and USA. The primary goals of the research are to examine how cryptocurrencies affect financial markets and conventional banking systems; to examine how blockchain technology might be used in the financial sector; to assess policy and regulatory considerations; and to predict and plan for the future. This research digs into how cryptocurrencies have revolutionized the banking and finance sectors. Analysis of adoption rates, market volatility, and integration methods sheds light on the changing position of cryptocurrencies in investment portfolios, reconfiguration of asset classes, and coping mechanisms of conventional financial institutions. When looking at the financial sector as a whole, the transformational potential of blockchain technology becomes clear. The advent of DeFi, smart contracts, and asset tokenization offers new prospects to improve financial transactions, increase transparency, and broaden participation in the investment market. The research analyzes cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology from a policy and regulatory perspective. The delicate balancing act between stimulating innovation and guaranteeing consumer protection, market integrity, and financial stability is highlighted by a comparison of the regulatory methods adopted in the United Kingdom and United States, as well as proposals from international organizations. The research identifies potential future paths for these technologies and their implications. Opportunities and challenges that will influence the future of finance emerge, with a focus on central bank digital currencies (CBDCs), sustainable blockchain solutions, and interdisciplinary collaborations. As this deep dive comes to a close, the transformational power of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology is highlighted. It sheds light on the forces that are altering the structures of the world’s financial markets, conventional banking structures, and regulatory frameworks. The findings and critical assessment stress the need for well-considered choices, ethical innovation, and interdisciplinary cooperation in order to succeed in an ever-changing environment. To further democratize access, improve transparency, and reshape the economic fabric of our planet, the future of finance resides at the confluence of tradition and innovation, where cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology exist. Keywords: cryptocurrency; blockchain; financial market; USA; UK; traditional banking system In the world of contemporary finance, the advent of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology has heralded a paradigm shift, altered the face of financial markets, and posed a serious threat to established banking practices. Cryptocurrencies and blockchain have spawned a wave of new possibilities and threats that need in-depth study due to the dynamic interaction between these two disruptive forces. With an emphasis on the United Kingdom (UK) and United States of America (USA), this study sets out on an exploration J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58. https://doi.org/10.3390/jrfm17020058

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58 of the complex interconnections between cryptocurrencies, blockchain technology, finan- cial markets, and conventional banking institutions. Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency, has sparked widespread interest from technologists, financiers, and legislators. Because of their decentralized structure, cross-border transactions, and promise for financial inclu- sion, cryptocurrencies have caused a significant shift in conventional financial practices (Hasan et al. 2023a). At the same time, blockchain technology has emerged as the back- bone of cryptocurrencies and has the potential to revolutionize operations far beyond the realm of digital money. Its immutability, transparency, and increased security have piqued the curiosity of many in industry, but those in the financial industry in particular. The development and spread of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology have been heralded as a watershed moment in the fight against centrally controlled financial systems. The significance of Bitcoin has increased as its value has risen (Meiryani et al. 2022). A blockchain, however, is only a network of data nodes linked through connections and operating independently (Gorkhali et al. 2020). It operates on a decentralized, open, and digital ledger with no single repository. Blockchain data are stored in units called blocks, each of which includes a partition header and block content. The original data are stored in the partition header, whereas transaction data are stored in the block body (An elaborate mechanism for reaching agreement on encryption keys is used to verify users’ identities (Nakamoto 2018). Each participant in this protocol contributes to a shared ledger with the others. Each transaction is guaranteed to be immutable and consistent thanks to this shared ledger. Public, private, permissioned, and permissionless models are the four most popular types (Huckle and White 2016). In contrast to private blockchains, which are exclusively available to a select group of users, public blockchains may be accessed by anybody. The complicated permission systems of blockchain and cryptocurrencies guarantee data privacy and security without intervention from any central authority, which is what initially draws in investors. Despite the fact that their social impact is still up in the air according to some academics (Campbell-Verduyn 2019), others have proposed that a new branch of law called the lex cryptographic will emerge as a result of the convergence of law and algorithms to govern the actions and interactions of agents. This is why several sectors, including healthcare, e-commerce, the energy industry, and the financial sector, have come to depend upon them heavily. Fintech is also making great strides, with methods like “digital coins” simplifying and eliminating the inherent risks associated with funding new company ventures (Aydemir and Aysan 2023). Self-executing security protocols like “Proof of Work” (PoW), “Proof of Stake” (PoS), and “Smart Contracts” are boosting its viability in the financial industry. In addition, this technology has been shown to help with trade finance’s existing problems. Trust mechanisms, transaction authority, information transfer, and transaction traceability are all examples of such concerns (Chang et al. 2019). There has been a recent tendency and some effort made to attempt to control blockchain transactions, although this is primarily outside of government-imposed rules. It seems, however, that the goal of these rules is to boost consumer trust in blockchain-based transactions rather than to dictate their form or content. In order to provide solid guidelines for future study in this sector, conducting a thorough evaluation of existing research on blockchain technology With their respective financial ecosystems, legal frameworks, and technical infrastruc- tures, the United Kingdom and United States are at the forefront of this financial revolution. The goal of this study is to shed light on how cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology have affected these countries’ financial markets and their conventional banking institutions, which have been cornerstones of their economies for decades. Examining the impact of cryptocurrencies as investment assets, means of exchange, and possible threats to estab- lished financial systems is the focus of this section of the research. The purpose of this study is to provide an in-depth examination of how these digital assets have modified the functioning of markets, the attitudes of investors, and the security of financial institutions in the United Kingdom and United States. It also plans to investigate how conventional

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58 financial institutions are responding to the advent of digital currencies and how they are dealing with the dangers that come with this transition. This study seeks to provide a nuanced understanding of how blockchain is reshaping financial processes, improving operational efficiency, and potentially revolutionizing the core functions of traditional banking systems in both countries through an examination of use cases, such as smart contracts, decentralized finance (DeFi), and cross-border payments. The United Kingdom and United States are fascinating case studies because they show how differently cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology are regulated in each country. This study aims to add to the continuing discussion about the future of finance in a digital and linked world by analyzing the experiences of these two countries. The subsequent chapters will take the reader on a journey through the backgrounds, theoretical frameworks, empirical analyses, and policy implications of cryptocurrencies, blockchain technology, financial markets, and the conventional banking systems of the United Kingdom and United States. The importance of this research lies in the depth to which it investigates the revolutionary effects of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology on UK and USA financial markets and on conventional banking institutions (Hasan et al. 2022). As the world’s financial system undergoes a radical transformation, this study adds to the ongoing conversation in the following ways: This research helps investors, financial institutions, and regulators better understand the effects of cryptocurrencies on financial markets so that they may better navigate the changing investment environment and reduce related risks. The study’s analysis of how traditional banking systems have incorporated cryptocurrencies and responded to technological disruption can help other financial institu- tions to think creatively about how to stay competitive in the face of similar challenges. The research provides a road map for financial institutions, technologists, and entrepreneurs to harness the transformative capabilities of DLT, which may revolutionize conventional financial processes and promote financial inclusion through a thorough examination of blockchain technology’s potential applications in finance. The research adds to an understanding of the diversity of methods used to tackle the difficulties and possibilities provided by cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology by comparing regulatory responses in the UK and USA. These findings may help policymakers craft rules that are both innovative and successful at protecting consumers and the economy. The study’s exploration of future prospects and challenges informs stakeholders about the potential trajectories of financial markets and banking systems, allowing them to do so. A deeper understanding of the dynamics of cryptocurrencies, blockchain technology, financial markets, and conventional banking institutions is a welcome addition to the existing literature in the fields of finance, economics, and technology. It lays the groundwork for future research and theoretical advancements in various areas of study. The advent of cryptocurrencies and the development of blockchain technology have been transformative and paradigm-shifting forces in the world of finance, prompting the need to rethink long-held assumptions and standards. This literature study delves into the complex world of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology, analyzing its effects on the banking industry in the UK and USA, the stock market, and other areas related to finance. This study aims to provide complete knowledge of the developing role of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology in the financial sector by reviewing a wide variety of academic publications, empirical investigations, and industry reports. 2.1. Cryptocurrencies: Transforming Financial Markets According to recent research, cryptocurrencies have the ability to fundamentally alter existing monetary systems (Chang et al. 2019). Beyond their function as digital instruments of trade, the complexities of cryptocurrencies are investigated here. They may, nevertheless, serve as powerful disruptors, sparking fundamental changes in market dynamics (Chang et al. 2019). Digital currencies, spearheaded by the revolutionary Bitcoin, are a new kind of investment

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58 instrument that defies established conventions. Research by academics like Baur et al. (2018) and Cheah and Fry (2015) highlights the diversification advantages of Bitcoin investing. In addition, the research shows how the incorporation of these methods into conventional portfolios has altered the risk profiles of investment strategies (Osmani et al. 2020). The rise of cryptocurrencies as a separate asset class has prompted a rethinking of how investors diversify their holdings. Their infancy is a factor in the extreme volatility that has been compared to both speculative bubbles and game-changing breakthroughs (Gandal et al. 2018; Sadiq et al. 2023). It is important to note that market mood and investor behavior have a significant impact on the prices of cryptocurrencies (Gandal et al. 2018). Recent market changes have emphasized the need for investors in the United Kingdom and United States to review their risk tolerance and investing strategies. Cryptocurrency adoption adds a new level of complexity to existing risk management systems, which might have far-reaching effects on the international financial system (Chen and Bellavitis 2019). Narayanan et al. (2020) argues that the disruptive potential of cryptocurrencies to traditional financial institutions represents a paradigm shift. The decentralized nature of cryptocurrencies is shaking up a financial system that has relied on centralized institutions for decades (Narayanan et al. 2020). Remittances, foreign payments, and peer-to-peer deals are all impacted by the use of cryptography, which in turn influences the environment in which these activities may take place (Narayanan et al. 2020). Inquiries into the consequences for monetary policy and financial stability are war- ranted in light of the fact that cryptocurrencies provide a serious threat to the monopoly of central banks in currency supply (Yermack 2013). Central bank digital currencies (CBDCs) are gaining momentum as a reaction to Bitcoin’s popularity (Prasad 2014). As a result, the dynamic between CBDCs and cryptocurrencies creates a complicated nexus that calls for careful analysis within the context of the development of financial markets. Cryptocurren- cies have progressed well beyond their original function as digital tokens, ushering in a new age of unparalleled upheaval inside monetary institutions (Duchenne 2018). Portfolio diversification, volatility in the United Kingdom and United States financial markets, and reevaluation of traditional financial intermediaries are only some of the topics that will be discussed in the next discussion (Duchenne 2018). The emergence of cryptocurrencies has also sparked discussions about the central banks of the future and the far-reaching effects this may have on monetary systems. Cryptocurrencies will have long-lasting effects on financial markets, forcing established players to rethink their strategies and grab new possibilities presented by the ongoing digital transformation. The next sections will dive into the evolution of conventional banking institutions to reflect these new realities, and the possible uses of blockchain technology in the financial industry will be investigated. 2.2. Adapting Traditional Banking Systems The introduction of cryptocurrencies marked the beginning of a new age of financial innovation, forcing traditional banking institutions to undertake a radical transformation to maintain their relevance in the modern digital economy. Traditional financial institutions are adapting to the possibilities and threats posed by the cryptocurrency revolution, and this section looks into that nuanced process. Traditional financial institutions have been forced to rethink and retool their operations in light of the disruptive potential of cryptocurrencies. Casu and Girardone (2010) explain how the sudden popularity of cryptocurrencies has forced banks in the United Kingdom and United States to rethink their strategies and place greater emphasis on customer service. Traditional banks are struggling to meet the increased client demand for easy access and administration of both traditional fiat money and digital assets. Financial institutions have been motivated to investigate possible collaborations with fintech businesses since the introduction of cryptocurrencies into the fabric of conventional banking systems has sparked a surge of innovation. Blockchain, the underlying technology of cryptocurrencies, has sparked partnerships between traditional financial institutions and fintech startups. Financial institutions are using blockchain

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58 technology to improve the safety and speed of local and international money transfers, settlements, and regulatory compliance, according to research by Mullen and Finn (2022). Central banks have initiated their own investigation into digital money in the form of Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDCs) in reaction to the cryptocurrency revolution. Central banks have developed CBDCs as a strategic step toward digital innovation while maintaining authority over currency issues and monetary policy. The subtle balance aimed for by CBDCs is emphasized by Prasad (2014). Thomason et al. (2018) discuss the ramifications of this seismic shift towards CBDCs for traditional financial institutions, including the need for modifications to risk management, client services, and overall business strategies. As Bitcoin transactions become more accepted, traditional banks in the United Kingdom and United States have the significant task of reducing risks connected with this development. These dangers include, among other things, increased vulnerability to cyberattack and the possibility of being entangled in illegal activity. Raskin et al. (2020) highlight the need for cyber security and keeping up with the ever-changing AML and KYC laws as cornerstones of effective risk management strategies. Traditional financial institutions that are implementing the integration of blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies have a duty to educate and engage their customers in a fast-digitizing financial environment. To help customers make the shift from traditional banking to the new digital financial paradigm, it is crucial to implement clear communication methods and intuitive interfaces. Traditional financial institutions need to take the initiative to adapt to the revolu- tionary effects of Bitcoin. As a result of the ongoing digital disruption, these institutions are engaging in complex processes of adaptation, including the reevaluation of business models, promotion of innovation through collaboration, and negotiating the murky waters of cryptocurrency exchanges and wallets. In the modern era of computing, blockchain technology has expanded well beyond its roots as the underlying technology of cryptocur- rencies, revealing several ground-breaking uses in the banking and finance industries. In this article, we will look at how blockchain’s revolutionary properties go far beyond finan- cial transactions. Trade settlement, supply chain financing, decentralized financial services, better compliance, and democratized access to investment possibilities are just a few of the areas that are discussed in relation to blockchain’s role in catalyzing innovation. Smart contracts are at the forefront of the revolutionary possibilities of blockchain technology. The potential of smart contracts to revolutionize traditional financial procedures has piqued a lot of people’s interests. Smart contracts are becoming more popular in areas such as trade settlement and supply chain finance, as noted by scholar Kshetri (2017). By automating contractual responsibilities, smart contracts improve productivity, decrease the chance of disagreement, and speed up the conclusion of complex transactions. Smart contracts have the potential to improve efficiency and reliability in the supply chain finance industry. Proof of blockchain’s transformative impact, DeFi threatens the relevance of middlemen in the financial services industry. DeFi is a blockchain-inspired financial platform that enables permissionless lending, borrowing, and trading, as described in detail by Casey (2020). By eliminating the need for banks and other financial institutions, DeFi gives its customers more freedom and independence while conducting international financial transactions. There are far-reaching consequences for regulatory compliance in the financial sector due to the irreversible and transparent nature of blockchain technology. Blockchain, as emphasized by Dai and Vasarhelyi (2017), has the ability to improve Know Your Customer and Anti-Money Laundering systems, simplifying compliance procedures by providing a trusted and verifiable record of transactions. Because of this, financial institutions have to deal with less paperwork, and the battle against financial crime is strengthened (Hasan et al. 2023b). The tokenization of assets is a major step forward in ensuring that more people have access to financial resources. The capacity of blockchain to provide fractional ownership of assets like real estate and stocks is highlighted by Böhme et al. (2015). Tokenization paves the way for investors to diversify their holdings by purchasing smaller portions of high-value assets. Tokenizing assets on blockchain makes investing more accessible and helps more people participate in the economy. Automation, decentralization, transparency, and democratic

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58 governance are just some of the emerging possibilities as blockchain’s financial applications develop. While decentralized banking challenges the foundation of traditional financial services, smart contracts reimagine the effectiveness of contractual agreements. Blockchain technology paves the way for a more accessible investing environment by making asset tokenization and faster regulatory procedures possible. As we explore the complex realm of policy and regulation in the following sections, it will become clear that the revolutionary potential of blockchain technology necessitates a balanced approach between innovative solutions and regulatory frameworks. This section details the steps taken to conduct a qualitative secondary research study in the United Kingdom (UK) and United States of America (USA) to investigate the effects of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology on financial markets, traditional banking systems, and potential applications in the financial sector. The purpose of this qualitative secondary research study is to examine the many facets of these revolutionary technologies in the selected countries by synthesizing and analyzing the relevant literature, empirical studies, industry reports, and policy documents already available. This qualitative secondary study was designed around a comprehensive literature review and synthesis. It includes gathering information from a wide range of academic and professional sources, processing that information, and drawing conclusions from those conclusions. This research intends to fill in the gaps in our knowledge of the effects of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology on the financial systems of the United King- dom and United States using a qualitative approach. The following steps constitute data collection: 1. PubMed, Google Scholar, IEEE Xplore, and JSTOR were among the academic databases scoured in depth using terms like “cryptocurrencies,” “blockchain technology,” “financial markets,” “banking systems,” “UK,” and “USA.” Articles in scholarly journals, papers presented at conferences, reports from the business sector, and government records 3.2. Selection of Sources The selection criteria were the sources’ trustworthiness, timeliness, and relevance to the study questions. Scholarly papers, official reports from banks, and the work of established authorities were accorded the most weight. Included sources shed light on how cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology have altered or might alter the financial landscape in either the United Kingdom or United States. All sources that were not written in English, were duplicates, or were deemed irrelevant 3.4. Analysis of Data Using thematic analysis methods, we coded data from a variety of sources in a method- ical fashion. The effects on financial markets, banking system modifications, and possible uses of blockchain technology were all highlighted as overarching themes, patterns, and trends across the research. 3.4.2. Analysis of Differences Research from both the United Kingdom and United States was compared. To obtain a thorough grasp of the topic, we compared and contrasted various legislative strategies, market dynamics, and technology uptakes.

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58 Since this was a qualitative secondary research project, the most important ethical issues were related to following copyright regulations and giving appropriate credit to the original authors. References and citations for all used sources were meticulously checked for accuracy in line with accepted scholarly practices (Sadiq et al. 2023). One restriction is that the study relies heavily on previously published material. The study was restricted in its capacity to uncover novel information since it relied so heavily on secondary sources. The inclusion of certain sources and exclusion of others, despite attempts to guarantee fair representation, may create a possible bias. This type of qualitative secondary research provides a solid foundation for investigating the effects of blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies on UK and USA economies in detail. The complex relationship between these technologies and the financial systems of the chosen nations was examined on the basis of a thorough analysis and synthesis of the available research (Kayani 2023). This methodology enabled the generation of valuable insights that contribute to the ongoing discourse about the transformative potential of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology in the context of contemporary finance through the use of thematic coding, comparative analysis, and adherence to ethical considerations. Table 1 provides a concise overview of how Bitcoin and Ethereum may have affected UK and USA stock market volatility between 2019 and 2022. Considering that Bitcoin’s volatility index in the UK was only 0.76, conventional asset diversification likely improved. Better volatility, as shown by Ethereum’s volatility index value of 1.12 in the United States, might have led to better portfolio returns with careful trading. Table 1. Overview of Cryptocurrency Impact on Financial Market Volatility. Impact on Traditional Assets Intriguing insights into the dynamics of cryptocurrency adoption within the UK and USA are revealed via a rigorous review of the offered adoption rates and variables affecting the adoption of cryptocurrencies between 2019 and 2022. In Table 2 the UK’s low cryptocurrency adoption rate of 17% shows the country’s cautious attitude to the sector. One of the most influential factors found was the clarity of regulations. The established regulatory framework in the UK gave prospective adopters confidence, which encouraged them to start using cryptocurrencies. Concerns about the unpredictability of cryptocurrencies and the possibility of new regulations may be to blame for their slower pace of adoption. This finding implies that a sizeable section of the public may remain skeptical or hesitant despite regulatory measures. In contrast, the United States had a greater adoption rate, 25%, due to the country’s higher level of technological literacy. This increased incidence was probably due to the predominance of tech-savvy people and a culture of innovation. The United States has a more receptive atmosphere for Bitcoin adoption due to its strong technological infrastructure and familiarity with digital advancements. The question of whether this acceptance is driven by financial motives or true value in ordinary interactions must be carefully examined. Table 2. Comparative Analysis of Cryptocurrency Adoption Rates in the UK and USA.

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58 Questions concerning the extent of adoption arise with closer inspection of both cases. Can we infer that these rates of adoption represented widespread use, or were they instead driven by an exclusive group of early adopters and investors? While it is true that well- defined rules help to build trust and stability, it is also important to think about how such rules might unintentionally restrict innovation or exclude some groups from participating. Furthermore, demographic, social, and cultural differences within each nation are not taken into consideration in the reported adoption rates. Examining whether adoption rates vary across demographics such as age, income, and location is an important part of any rigorous examination. These considerations may help to shed light on the broader social effects of The examination of adoption rates and contributing variables exemplifies the complex interplay of government oversight, technological advancement, and public opinion. The trajectory of Bitcoin adoption, and hence its place in the larger financial environment, is shaped by the interaction of these elements. Understanding the dynamics at play requires digging into the reasons behind these adoption rates and what it means for the future. Barclays has seen the need to tap into external knowledge of the fast developing world of cryptocurrencies by partnering with fintech startups to provide Bitcoin services (see Table 3). This strategy has the potential to allow Barclays to benefit from the fintech industry’s advanced technologies and cutting-edge approaches. A rigorous evaluation though makes one wonder how much authority Barclays really has over its Bitcoin business. Working with third parties may jeopardize the bank’s commitment to regulatory compli- ance, data security, and excellent customer service. When dealing with cryptocurrencies, the bank must negotiate the ever-changing regulatory environment while ensuring that all collaborations are in full compliance with the law. Table 3. Strategies Employed by Traditional Banks in the UK and USA to Integrate Cryptocurrencies. Collaborating with fintech to offer crypto services Developing a crypto trading platform for clients Citigroup’s initiative to build its own cryptocurrency trading platform exemplifies a forward-thinking attitude towards directly providing Bitcoin services to customers. This strategy is consistent with the bank’s goal of keeping tighter reins on everything that goes on. A safe and user-friendly crypto trading platform is hard and time- and resource-consuming to design and operate, as the critical study highlights. The need for comprehensive cybersecurity safeguards to secure the digital assets and sensitive information of customers is a huge challenge for Citigroup. The risks of hacking and fraud, among others, constitute an additional focus point that must be managed and mitigated. Both methods of integration provide insight into the various tactics banks use when venturing into the Bitcoin market. Barclays’ cooperative strategy highlights the potential advantages of collaborating with fintech startups to take advantage of their nimbleness and creativity. The difficulty of maintaining conformity with regulations, however, stresses the need to strike a balance between creative freedom and legal restraint. Conversely, Citigroup’s in-house development strategy is aimed at providing a more regulated and individualized service for customers. However, the issue of security reminds us that innova- tive cryptocurrency technology must be complemented by stringent cybersecurity measures to safeguard the bank and its customers. While there are many exciting possibilities for those who join the cryptocurrency area, the study of these integration techniques and problems illustrates the many complex issues that must be taken into account. It becomes clear that issues such as regulatory compliance, security, technical complexity, and customer experience play vital roles in determining whether or not a bank’s cryptocurrency efforts will be successful and sustainable. Banks need thorough and strategic approaches that take

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58 these issues into account if they are to successfully reap the advantages of cryptocurrencies while also navigating the intricacies of the current market. Differences in creativity and risk aversion explain why the United Kingdom and United States have taken opposite approaches to regulating cryptocurrencies. The Fi- nancial Conduct Authority’s (FCA) Cryptoasset Regulations are indicative of the UK’s forward-thinking approach, which reflects the country’s desire to encourage technological advancements in the cryptocurrency industry. Legitimate Bitcoin firms may benefit from the FCA’s framework, which aims to provide clarity and regulatory advice. However, the investigation raises concerns about the possible compromise between new features and customer security. Finding a happy medium needs constant attention to forestall fraud, market manipulation, and violations of consumer protection laws. The United States takes a cautious approach, as seen by the SEC’s Framework for Digital Assets, which places a premium on safeguarding investors and maintaining market confidence. The critical study makes us wonder about whether an excessively cautious strategy would limit technical improvements and hamper the expansion of the cryptocurrency industry, despite the fact that the method’s stated goal is to reduce risk and avoid possible market misuse. Finding a happy medium requires negotiating the nuances of a technical world that is always changing without stifling progress. It is clear that there is a need for unified cryptocurrency regulation in light of the proposals made by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the International Monetary Council on Financial Capability (FC): The recognition of the international character of cryptocurrencies has led to calls for the establishment of worldwide standards for the regulation of cryptoassets. This critical examination sheds light on the inherent difficulties in trying to impose a single set of regulations across many different jurisdictions with widely divergent approaches to regulation. It prompts speculation on the viability of developing a complete regulatory framework that accounts for the peculiarities of cryptocurrencies while uniformly addressing the hazards they pose. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has emphasized the need for international col- laboration in cryptocurrency regulation by recommending joint cross-border enforcement of rules. An examination of the situation from a critical perspective highlights the difficul- ties that may arise when trying to coordinate enforcement activities across countries that have diverse legal systems and regulatory goals. The issue of how well such cooperation can stop regulatory arbitrage and provide uniform supervision emerges. Listed here are two of the most important uses of blockchain technology in the banking and insurance sectors, along with brief explanations of how they work and the advantages they provide. Dispersed Financial Management (DeFi): The innovative idea of open finan- cial services without middlemen is highlighted, which is made possible by blockchain’s decentralized design. Improved reachability, openness, and command are among the advantages cited. In offering financial services directly to users and possibly changing the role of existing financial intermediaries, the critical study highlights the disruption that DeFi may provide to the established financial environment. However, risks, such as those posed by regulations and the need to educate users on how to utilize decentralized systems, are highlighted. The emphasis of the explanation is on trade settlement agreements that can execute themselves, stressing the possibilities for automation and a reduction in transaction times. Efficiency gains and simplified processes are among the cited advantages. The research confirms that smart contracts have the potential to significantly alter the face of business as we know it. It also highlights the need to fix technical issues and make sure code is executed correctly and securely, particularly in vital financial dealings. The following table demonstrates how blockchain technology might improve KYC and AML procedures: The need for Know Your Customer compliance. This approach uses en- crypted communication to improve data security and privacy for the consumer. The report highlights how blockchain has the potential to revolutionize the KYC process by allowing users to keep their data private while ensuring secure exchange with approved parties. It

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58 does, however, raise questions regarding the feasibility of widespread implementation and the maintenance of regulatory compliance. Money Laundering Regulations: The benefits of using real-time transaction moni- toring to quickly spot illegal behavior are underlined. The critical evaluation recognizes blockchain’s potential to provide an immutable audit record of transactions, which would aid AML initiatives. To successfully apply real-time monitoring, however, it raises the issue of the requirement for standardized procedures and cooperation across various financial institutions and regulatory organizations. Actual Property: Increasing liquidity and accessibility by way of tokenized fractional ownership is discussed. Real estate markets may become accessible to a greater variety of investors thanks to the democratization of investment options. The critical analysis does, however, call attention to the necessity for investor protection and the existence of significant legal and regulatory hurdles. The Stock Market: As a means of promoting diversity and lowering entry barriers, tokenized shares for micro-investing are proposed. This research highlights the opportunity to make investment more accessible and cheaper, particularly for individual investors. It prompts thoughts on the need for adequate investor education to deal with this changing landscape and possible regulatory hurdles. In conclusion, our study of the tables highlights the revolutionary potential of blockchain technology in the financial services industry while also stimulating critical thought about obstacles, regulatory concerns, and the necessity for a holistic strategy that takes advantage of opportunities while minimizing threats. Using a critical lens, this in-depth investigation of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology sought to answer the main research questions and achieve the study’s stated goals. As we wrap up our exploration, it is clear that the results have shed light on a landscape of innovation, disruption, and transition with far-reaching consequences for the present and future of finance, banking, and regulation. The purpose of the research was to look at how cryptocurrencies affect the banking industry and financial markets. Adoption rates, market volatility, and integration strategies have all been dissected in great depth, yielding a multifaceted picture. Cryptocurrencies are becoming a legitimate asset class, separate and apart from the arena of speculative investing. Table 1 shows how Bitcoin and Ethereum affect volatility, demonstrating their ability to di- versify investing options. Table 3 shows how traditional financial institutions like Barclays and Citigroup are transforming to meet the challenges posed by blockchain technology while remaining compliant with applicable regulations. The goal of this investigation of blockchain’s potential in the financial sector was to reveal the revolutionary potential of this technology. Tables 4–6 show how the research shed light on the potential paths of decentralized finance (DeFi), smart contracts, and asset tokenization. Financial services, accessibility, and process automation may all be improved with the help of these apps. The advantages of these applications were highlighted, and the need to tackle obstacles such as security issues, regulatory complications, and scalability concerns was emphasized by the Table 4. Potential Applications of Blockchain Technology in Financial Services.

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58 Table 5. Enhancing KYC and AML Compliance through Blockchain. Secure sharing of customer data Enhanced data security and privacy Swift detection of suspicious activities Table 6. Democratizing Investment through Asset Tokenization. Fractional ownership via tokens Increased liquidity and accessibility Tokenized shares for micro-investing Diversification and reduced barriers The report critically examined the tension between encouraging innovation and guar- anteeing regulatory compliance, delving into regulatory frameworks and suggesting co- ordinated measures. Table 7 illustrates the dynamic interaction between innovation and consumer protection via the contrast between the UK’s aggressive position and the USA’s cautious approach. Table 8 shows that international organizations have made proposals that highlight the worldwide significance of cryptocurrencies and so highlight the neces- sity for standardized regulation and international cooperation. In sum, this research has created a rich tapestry that includes economics, engineering, government policy, and social consequences. It has navigated a complicated terrain to answer research questions and achieve its goals of illuminating the possibilities, challenges, and possible repercussions. We are on the cusp of an age marked by the widespread use of blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies, making it imperative that we make well-informed choices, innovate in a responsible way, and work together to create a future in which these technologies can exist peacefully with established monetary structures. We can chart a path toward a more inclusive, transparent, and egalitarian financial environment for future generations by careful study, well-considered policymaking, and a joint dedication to leveraging the promise of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology. Table 7. Regulatory Approaches to Cryptocurrencies in the UK and USA. Table 8. Recommendations for Coordinated Regulatory Efforts. Financial Stability Board (FSB) Establish global standards for cryptoasset regulation International Monetary Fund (IMF) Collaborate on cross-border enforcement of regulations The investigation, “Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain Technology: Studying the Impact of Cryptocurrencies on Financial Markets and Traditional Banking Systems, or Delving into the Potential Applications of Blockchain Technology in Finance,” shed light on a complex landscape with far-reaching consequences for the banking sector, traditional financial systems, regulatory frameworks, and the global economy as a whole. Insights, thoughts, and possible implications resulting from the use and integration of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology have been exposed via this in-depth debate.

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58 5.1.1. Transformation of Financial Markets There has been a paradigm change in investing methods and asset classes, and the influence of cryptocurrencies on financial markets is critically examined. Table 1 displays the statistics on the volatility of cryptocurrency prices, which might affect the diversi- fication and returns of more conventional investing portfolios. Bitcoin and Ethereum’s rising popularity as investments reflects the expanding recognition of cryptocurrencies as alternative assets, which is changing the way portfolios are managed. 5.1.2. Adaptation of Banking Systems As shown in Table 3, two examples of how conventional banking systems are strategi- cally navigating the cryptocurrency environment are the integration strategies of Barclays and Citigroup. A growing number of banks and other financial organizations, as seen by these projects, are beginning to recognize the game-changing potential of blockchain technology. However, the accompanying difficulties illustrate the fine balance that banks must find between innovation and risk reduction, such as regulatory compliance and 5.1.3. Issues of Policy and Regulation The approaches to cryptocurrency regulation in the United Kingdom and United States, as well as proposals from international organizations, are discussed in detail in Tables 7 and 8. While the United Kingdom adopts a proactive, innovation-focused strategy, the United States takes a more conservative, investor-protecting position. Global cooperation is en- couraged by the suggestions of the Financial Stability Board and International Monetary Fund. Decisions made by regulators have far-reaching effects on markets, innovations in technology, and global competition. 5.1.4. The Future of Blockchain in the Financial Sector The revolutionary power of blockchain technology in the financial services indus- try is seen in Tables 4–6. The ramifications extend well beyond decentralized finance (DeFi) and smart contracts. Blockchain technology has the potential to revolutionize the delivery of financial services due to its capacity to improve Know Your Customer and Anti- Money Laundering compliance, enable real-time transaction monitoring, and democratize investing via asset tokenization. The critical study highlights the need to address technolog- ical problems, legislative impediments, and user education to realize these revolutionary 5.1.5. Future Research and International Cooperation International cooperation is necessary to handle the global consequences of cryptocur- rencies, as shown by a critical study of the suggestions for coordinated regulatory actions. Future study will be crucial in elucidating the long-term ramifications of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology as they continue to develop. Scholars and professionals alike need to investigate questions like how Bitcoin adoption will affect economies, how effective are existing regulatory frameworks, and what kind of ethical considerations should be made when dealing with decentralized finance. The conclusions derived from this extensive debate have far-reaching repercussions, not only in monetary and technological spheres. The convergence of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology raises questions about long-held assumptions, forces regulators to reevaluate their methods, and compels financial institutions to experiment or be left behind. It is important to weigh the advantages of enhanced accessibility, efficiency, and transparency against the dangers of volatility, security flaws, and regulatory ambiguity. For cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology to be integrated into the fabric of contemporary finance in a way that is both sustainable and fair, we need to adopt a holistic strategy that encourages innovation while protecting regulatory integrity as we go forward in this

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58 Several important future trends are set to impact the landscape of banking, technology, and the global economy as the world of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology continues to expand. In light of what has been learned and discussed thus far, more investigation into the following topics is needed in the next years: The ever-changing nature of cryptocurrencies calls for regulatory frameworks that can move with the times while also protecting consumers and businesses. Understanding the effects of various regulatory measures on investor confidence, market honesty, and technical progress is crucial for future studies. Furthermore, international organizations have stressed the need to establish global standards for cryptoasset regulation as a means of providing uniform and harmonized international supervision. DeFi’s potential to revolutionize the financial service industry is enormous, and it should be further studied. Research on the long-term viability of DeFi systems should focus on issues including scalability, interoperability, and regulatory compliance. As a corollary, it will be important to evaluate how open financial systems affect financial inclusion, wealth distribution, and conventional banking practices. Cybersecurity and data privacy are of paramount importance in the blockchain and cryptocurrency industries. Proactive security measures against hacking and protection of user identity should be the subject of future studies. There is hope for a compromise between openness and people’s right to privacy thanks to privacy-enhancing technology built into blockchain, such as zero-knowledge proofs. A growing number of people are interested in central bank-issued digital currencies (CBDCs). The implications of CBDC adoption on monetary policy, financial stability, international trade, and the economy as a whole should be investigated in future studies. Furthermore, it is important to examine the connections between CBDCs, cryptocurrencies, and conventional banking. There is rising worry about the potential negative effects of blockchain technology on the environment, in particular its high energy requirements. Energy-efficient consensus procedures and sustainable blockchain infrastructures should be the focus of future study. For blockchain technology to survive in the long run, it will be essential to learn about the environmental impact of different networks and suggest greener options. Cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology raise important ethical questions that need to be thoroughly investigated. Problems like the “digital divide,” “wealth inequality,” and “the potential for new forms of financial exclusion” need to be investigated in the future. Understanding the moral implications of blockchain technology, smart contracts, and tokenization is crucial for building equitable financial infrastructure. Cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology have many applications, thus experts from different fields must work together. Financial, technological, legal, economic, social, and ethical scholars should work together in future studies. Researchers may provide complete answers to complicated problems if they promote a holistic awareness of the consequences and promise of these technologies. In conclusion, the long-term outlook for cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology is fraught with both exciting potential and daunting obstacles. Researchers, politicians, and business stakeholders must work together to navigate the unknown seas ahead as new technologies continue to reshape financial services, governance, and social interactions. A more just, safe, and revolutionary incorporation of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology into the global economic fabric may be achieved by addressing the many factors investigated in this research and following the roadmaps laid forth herein. Although much has been learned by investigating cryptocurrency and blockchain technology, it is crucial to be honest about the caveats of the research. These restrictions set boundaries for the study’s results and conclusions and provide direction for future studies that try to overcome them. Cryptocurrency usage, blockchain applications, and regulatory issues are just some of the complicated themes into which this research will delve. The current research may not have gone into as much depth as necessary on certain points due

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58 to space constraints. More in-depth studies may be conducted in the future to shed light on The study’s conclusions may be less transferable to other locations with different governmental frameworks, cultural attitudes, and technological infrastructures due to the study’s exclusive emphasis on the United Kingdom and United States. The study’s findings may not be representative of the wide range of situations and points of view found in nations with varying degrees of Bitcoin adoption. The sources and methods utilized to collect the data included in this analysis, including adoption rates, volatility indexes, and regulatory approaches, all contribute to its accuracy and dependability. The validity of the study’s findings may be compromised by inconsistencies in data quality and the presence of possible biases in data collection. Maintaining accurate data is difficult due to the fast-paced nature of technological development and legislative changes in the Bitcoin and blockchain field. The study’s conclusions, suggestions, and future directions may be greatly affected by the introduction of new technologies, the emergence of new use cases, and the development of new legislation. The research may have overlooked important ethical, social, and environmental concerns related to cryptocurrency and blockchain technology due to its heavy emphasis on technical, financial, and legal factors. To tackle these facets, we must work together across disciplines and examine the repercussions for society as It is possible that the sample of reviewed institutions and currencies is not represen- tative of the whole. The study’s findings may not be representative of the ecosystem as a whole due to the limited nature of the examples used. In conclusion, it is crucial to acknowledge the study’s limits while acknowledging the useful insights into the com- plicated world of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology. To better understand the complex implications and dynamics of this rapidly developing field, future research should incorporate real-time data, broaden the scope to encompass a wider range of countries and contexts, and engage in interdisciplinary collaborations to address these gaps. Author Contributions: Conceptualization—U.K. and F.H.; methodology—U.K.; software—F.H.; validation—U.K. and F.H.; formal analysis—U.K.; investigation—F.H.; resources—U.K.; data curation—F.H.; writing—original draft preparation—F.H.; writing—review and editing—U.K.; visualization—U.K.; supervision—U.K.; project administration—F.H. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: This research received no external funding. Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. Aydemir, Murat, and Ahmet Aysan. 2023. Regulating the unregulated: The advent of Fintech regulations and their impacts on equity-based crowdfunding. BRICS Law Journal 10: 4–18. [CrossRef] Baur, Dirk, Kihoon Hong, and Adrian Lee. 2018. Bitcoin: Medium of exchange or speculative assets? Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money 54: 177–89. [CrossRef] Böhme, Rainer, Nicolas Christin, Benjamin Edelman, and Tyler Moore. 2015. Bitcoin: Economics, Technology, and Governance. Journal of Economic Perspectives 29: 213–38. [CrossRef] Campbell-Verduyn, M. A. 2019. Introduction to special section on blockchains and financial globalization. Global Networks 19: 283–90. Casey, Michael. 2020. Money Reimagined: Bitcoin and Ethereum Are a DeFi Double Act. Available online: https://www.coindesk. com/business/2020/07/03/money-reimagined-bitcoin-and-ethereum-are-a-defi-double-act/ (accessed on 31 December 2020). Casu, Barbara, and Claudia Girardone. 2010. Integration and efficiency convergence in EU banking markets. Omega 38: 260–67. Chang, Shuchih Ernest, Hueimin Louis Luo, and YiChian Chen. 2019. Blockchain-Enabled Trade Finance Innovation: A Potential Paradigm Shift on Using Letter of Credit. Sustainability 12: 188. [CrossRef] Cheah, Eng-Tuck, and John Fry. 2015. Speculative bubbles in Bitcoin markets? An empirical investigation into the fundamental value of Bitcoin. Economics Letters 130: 32–36. [CrossRef]

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2024, 17, 58 Chen, Yan, and Cristiano Bellavitis. 2019. Decentralized Finance: Blockchain Technology and the Quest for an Open Financial System. Stevens Institute of Technology School of Business Research Paper. Hoboken. Available online: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers. cfm?abstract_id=3418557 (accessed on 31 December 2020). Dai, Jun, and Miklos A. Vasarhelyi. 2017. Toward blockchain-based accounting and assurance. Journal of Information Systems 31: 5–21. Duchenne, James. 2018. Blockchain and smart contracts: Complementing climate finance, legislative frameworks, and renewable energy projects. In Transforming Climate Finance and Green Investment with Blockchains. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press, pp. Gandal, Neil, J. T. Hamrick, Tyler Moore, and Tali Oberman. 2018. Price manipulation in the Bitcoin ecosystem. Journal of Monetary Economics 95: 86–96. [CrossRef] Gorkhali, Anjee, Ling Li, and Asim Shrestha. 2020. Blockchain: A literature review. Journal of Management Analytics 7: 321–43. Hasan, Fakhrul, Manaf Al-Okaily, Tonmoy Choudhury, and Umar Kayani. 2023a. A comparative analysis between Fintech and Traditional stock markets: Using Russia and Ukraine WAR data. Electronic Commerce Research, in press. [CrossRef] Hasan, Fakhrul, Mary Fiona Ross Bellenstedt, and Mohammad Raijul Islam. 2023b. The impact of demand and supply disruptions during the COVID-19 crisis on firm productivity. Global Journal of Flexible Systems Management 24: 87–105. [CrossRef] [PubMed] Hasan, Fakhrul, Umar Kayani, Assim Ibrahim Abdel-Razzaq, and Tonmoy Choudhury. 2022. Interest rate changes and dividend announcements effect on stock returns: Evidence from frontier economy. Pakistan Journal of Commerce and Social Sciences 16: Huckle, Steve, and Martin White. 2016. Socialism and the Blockchain. Future Internet 8: 49. [CrossRef] Kayani, Umar. 2023. Exploring prospects of blockchain and fintech: Using SLR approach. Journal of Science and Technology Policy Management, in press. [CrossRef] Kshetri, Nir. 2017. Blockchain’s Roles in Strengthening Cybersecurity and Protecting Privacy. Telecommunications Policy 41: 1027–38. Meiryani, Meiryani, Caineth Delvin Tandyopranoto, Jason Emanuel, A. S. L. Lindawati, Mochammad Fahlevi, Mohammed Aljuaid, and Fakhrul Hasan. 2022. The effect of global price movements on the energy sector commodity on Bitcoin price movement during the COVID-19 pandemic. Heliyon 8: e10820. [CrossRef] [PubMed] Mullen, Tony, and Peter Finn. 2022. Towards an Evaluation Metric for Carbon-Emitting Energy Provenance of Bitcoin Transactions. Paper presented at Fourth ACM International Symposium on Blockchain and Secure Critical Infrastructure, Nagasaki, Japan, May 30–June 3; pp. 11–21. Nakamoto, Satoshi. 2018. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. Computer Science. Available online: https://www.ussc. Narayanan, Santhanakrishnan, Emmanouil Chaniotakis, and Constantinos Antoniou. 2020. Shared autonomous vehi-cle services: A comprehensive review. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 111: 255–93. [CrossRef] Osmani, Mohamad, Ramzi El-Haddadeh, Nitham Hindi, Marijn Janssen, and Vishanth Weerakkod. 2020. Blockchain for next generation services in banking and finance: Cost, benefit, risk and opportunity analysis. Journal of Enterprise Information Management 34: Prasad, Ramjee. 2014. 5G: 2020 and Beyond, 1st ed. Denmark: River Publishers. Raskin, Max, Saleh Fahad, and David Yermack. 2020. How do Private Digital Currencies Affect Government Policy? World Scientific Book Chapters. In Digital Currency Economics And Policy. Edited by Bernard Yeung. Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., chap. 12, pp. 111–15. Sadiq, Misbah, Ahmet Faruk Aysan, and Umar Kayani. 2023. Digital currency and blockchain security in accelerating financial stability: A mediating role of credit supply. Borsa Istanbul Review 23: 1251–62. [CrossRef] Thomason, Jane, Mira Ahmad, Pascale Bronder, Edward Hoyt, Steven Pocock, Julien Bouteloupe, Katrina Donaghy, David Huysman, Tony Willenberg, Ben Joakim, and et al. 2018. Blockchain—Powering and empowering the poor in developing countries. In Transforming Climate Finance and Green Investment with Blockchains. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press, pp. 137–52. Yermack, David. 2013. Is Bitcoin a Real Currency? An Economic Appraisal. Working Paper No. w19747. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

---NEW PAPER---

A hybrid deep learning model for cryptocurrency returns forecasting: Comparison of the performance of financial markets and impact of external variables Ismail Jirou a, Ikram Jebabli a,*, Amine Lahiani b,c a Rabat Business School, Universit´e Internationale de Rabat, Morocco b LEO-Laboratoire d’Economie d’Orl´eans, France c GUST Center for Sustainable Development, Gulf University for Science and Technology, Kuwait A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T This study introduces a finetuned hybrid forecasting model combining both Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) and Long Short-Term Memory network (LSTM) to predict dirty and clean cryptocurrency returns (Bitcoin and Ripple). The findings show that the proposed DWT-LSTM model outperforms a large set of benchmark models in terms of forecasting accuracy. We investigate a broader set of predictors involving financial markets (other cryptocurrencies and commodities) and external variables (blockchain information, Twitter economic uncertainty, and CO2 emissions). Our findings underline the comparable performance of the considered predictors, with the Twitter Economic Uncertainty index being the best predictor of Bitcoin returns and S&P GSCI Energy being the best predictor of Ripple returns. We also highlight the superior perfor- mance of the trading strategies based on our forecasting results. Cryptocurrencies are characterized by high volatility, noisy price fluctuations, and price bubbles (Chaim and Laurini, 2018; Hafner, 2018; Katsiampa, 2017). Determining the factors that affect the monetary value of cryptocurrencies is essential for forecasting future prices and estimating expected returns (Li and Wang, 2017; Mai et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2021; Ly´ocsa et al., 2020). Cryptocurrency returns could potentially be forecasted by considering several driving factors, such as, number and cost of transactions, trading volume, Google trends, sentiment in newspaper reports, environmental variables, other traditional markets and economic policy uncertainty (e.g., Kristoufek, 2013, 2015; Polasik et al., 2015; Balcilar et al., 2017; Hayes, 2017; Bouri et al., 2017a, 2017b, 2018a, 2018b; Demir et al., 2018; Ji et al., 2019; Cong and He, 2019; Ren and Lucey, 2022; Kubal and Kristoufek, 2022; Kraaijeveld and de Smedt, 2020; Xie et al., 2020, Clark et al., 2023). The escalating environmental concerns have led to a division within the cryptocurrency market, distinguishing between green (clean) and dirty categories based on the energy consumption involved in the mining process (Yousaf et al., 2023). Recent studies explore the relationship between cryptocurrencies and green financial assets (Arfaoui et al., 2023; Pham et al., 2022; Naeem and Karim, 2021). Ren and Lucey (2022) assert that dirty cryptocurrencies rely on PoW algorithms for consensus, leading to substantial energy consumption for both mining and transactions, while clean cryptocurrencies utilize various energy-efficient consensus algorithms. E-mail address: ikram.jebabli@uir.ac.ma (I. Jebabli). Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Research in International Business and Finance Received 6 March 2024; Received in revised form 10 July 2024; Accepted 6 September 2024 Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575 Available online 13 September 2024 0275-5319/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

A literature review reveals a growing demand for the development of accurate forecasting models. Autoregressive models have been used to investigate the predictability of returns; however, these models have a limited capacity to create accurate forecasts because of the nonlinear and nonstationary nature of financial market movements (Hansen and Lunde, 2005). To solve nonlinear challenges, Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) algorithms1 have attracted the interest of academics and practitioners owing to their ability to capture complex nonlinear relationships in input data and predict financial market movements without relying on traditional assumptions (Atsalakis et al., 2019). However, a review of previous studies employing machine learning methods reveals that most used manual tuning and fixed parameters which presents significant drawbacks including the need for specialized expertise, the potential for human bias, and a lack of flexibility. Therefore, this study aims to address some of the limitations identified in the existing literature concerning model selection and random parameter tunning in cryptocurrency return prediction by proposing a finetuned hybrid deep learning model, Discrete Wavelet Transformation-Long Short-Term Memory (DWT-LSTM). This model is optimized by sampling random combinations of hyper- parameters to identify the optimal set that yields the best performance on the validation datasets. This model forecasts the returns of two types of cryptocurrencies (Bitcoin for dirty and Ripple for clean), considering financial markets (other cryptocurrencies and commodities) as predictors and additional variables related to blockchain information, Twitter economic uncertainty, and CO2 The results demonstrate the performance of the finetuned DWT-LSTM model compared to other ML and DL models and highlight the comparable performance of the considered predictors, with the Twitter Economic Uncertainty index and S&P GSCI Energy being, respectively, the best predictors of Bitcoin and Ripple returns. This study also reports the implications of the forecasting results on Bitcoin and Ripple trading strategies, allowing for better risk management, lower maximum drawdowns, and remarkable Sharpe and Sortino ratios, which underlines the usefulness of our proposed model as a trading support system. The subsequent sections of this paper are organized as follows. Section 2 delves into the relevant literature. Section 3 outlines our proposed model. Section 4 provides details about the data used in this study and discusses the results. Finally, Section 5 draws the conclusion, offering policy implications and exploring potential avenues for future research. According to Chen et al. (2021), considering the various determinants of cryptocurrencies to predict their returns is necessary. Based on previous literature, these determinants can be classified into four main categories: The first category corresponds to economic factors i.e., commodities, foreign exchange rates, stock market indices and economic uncertainty (Qiu et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2020; Salisu et al.; 2023). The second category is related to technology factors, i.e., blockchain information such as block size, number of transactions per block, hash rate, and miner revenue (Guo et al., 2021; Gradojevic et al., 2021). Public attention (e.g., Tweets and Google trends) corresponds to the third category (Guo et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Dias et al., 2022) whereas the last category involves environmental factors (Clark et al., 2023). Few studies have combined several factors to understand cryptocurrency market behavior (Zhong et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2021; Hajek et al., 2023). Table 1 summarizes the related literature An increasing number of empirical studies have analyzed the predictors of cryptocurrencies by resorting to conventional statistical, econometric, ML, and DL models. For instance, Catania et al. (2019) rely on Dynamic Model Averaging to conduct a comparative analysis of several alternative econometric models for the forecasting of four cryptocurrencies (Bitcoin, Litecoin, Ripple, and Ether- eum) from August 8, 2015, to December 28, 2017, using a set of predictors (stock indices, gold, and interest rates). They emphasize the notable enhancement in point forecasting through the utilization of combinations of univariate models. Additionally, there is a noteworthy improvement in density forecasting when employing a selection of multivariate models. Liu and Tsyvinski (2021) examine the predictors of Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Ripple and conclude that cryptocurrency returns are influenced by cryptocurrency network factors but not production factors, and that cryptocurrency-specific factors (momentum and investor attention) strongly predict their returns. Bouri et al. (2022) find that their proposed model, based on Standard Factor models and Regime-Switching Factor loadings, outperforms the benchmark random walk in forecasting the returns of Bitcoin, Ethereum, Ripple, Dogecoin, and Litecoin while considering their lagged returns and other cryptocurrencies as predictors over the period from November 2016 to September 2021. Using OLS regression, Clark et al. (2023) show that combined levels of CO2 emissions can effectively predict Bitcoin and Ethereum returns, underlining the growing influence of environmental considerations on the performance of these cryptocurrencies. On the other hand, various ML and DL models have recently been proposed to forecast cryptocurrency returns owing to their characteristics of easy feature engineering and good performance. Sun et al. (2020) resort to three machine learning models (SVM, RF, and LGBM) to forecast the cryptocurrency market returns using daily data of 42 cryptocurrencies combined with stock markets, crude oil and fiat currencies during the period from January 1, 2018, to June 30, 2018 and find that LGBM stands out to be the best forecasting model compared to the other models. Gradojevic et al. (2021) use RF to forecast one-day-ahead Bitcoin prices from May 11, 2015, to March 7, 2019. They find that Bitcoin was driven primarily by its trend and momentum from 2015 to 2017, whereas market sentiment factors such as fear, greed, Google search patterns, and trading volume played a dominant role in shaping its behavior in 2018 and 2019. Chen et al. (2021) use ANN and RF to reduce the subset of potential predictors by assessing the importance of economic as well as tech- nological factors that are integrated into long LSTM to predict Bitcoin prices regardless of historical prices during the period from 1 Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Machines (SVM), XGBoost (XGB), Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LGBM), Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM). I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

Summary of the related literature. Target: Bitcoin, Litecoin, Ripple, and Ethereum Predictors: stock indices, gold, and interest rates The combinations of all variables enhance the forecasting accuracy of cryptocurrencies. Predictors: Google trends and tweets, as well as Google trends and tweets, as well as Bitcoin trading data, improve the prediction accuracy Target: Bitcoin, Ethereum, Ripple, Dogecoin, Predictors: Bitcoin, Ethereum, Ripple, Dogecoin, Litecoin, Stellar, Ethereum Classic, Moreno, NEO, Waves, Dash, Decred, Zcash and Factor models (specially regime-switching versions) outperforms the random-walk Predictors: blockchain information, Google Trends, tweets, TSE100, DOW30, VIX, SSE, crude oil price, gold price, S&P500, and NASDAQ. CHF, EUR, GBP, JPY, CNY and US Bitcoin prices are influenced by different economic and technology factors. Predictors: open, high, low, close, adjective close and volume of Bitcoin LTSM has a noticeable improvement compared to SARIMA and Facebook prophet. Target: Bitcoin, Ethereum, Tether and TrueUSD Predictors: global temperature anomalies and CO2 emissions, gold, WTI CO2 emissions significantly predict the returns of Bitcoin and Ethereum. Target: Bitcoin and Ethereum Predictors: realized volatility, jump components of RV, realized positive semi-variance, realized negative semi-variance, global economic un- certainty index, the US economic uncertainty index, geopolitical risk index, consumer and producer price index in the US, crude oil ETF volatility index, gold ETF volatility index, effective federal funds rate, nominal broad U.S. dollar index, West Texas intermediate crude oil index, brent crude oil prices, Google trend, Regularization models based on dynamic tuning (Lasso-tune, Ridge-tune, Ela-tune) outperform the benchmark model HAR-RV in Hash rate and the effective federal funds rate play significant forecasting role among the Predictors: technical indicators, fear & greed, Google search, and volume Random Forest trained on technical indicators is better than the random walk and Bitcoin is driven by its trend and momentum, fear, greed, Google searches, and volume. Predictors: Bitcoin prices, blockchain WT-CA-TCN achieves the best performance when prices, blockchain information, social and interest data are considered. Predictors: 980 Financial Times news articles with “bitcoin,”, “btc”, “Bitcoin or “BTC,” or Machine learning models with financial news show the best performance. Trading strategy using the proposed forecasting model is more profitable than a Predictors: Blockchain information, Google trends, Effective Federal Funds Rate, Unemployment Rate, Inflation, VIX, Gold, Market State Dynamic Commodity Index, PIMCO investment-grade bond ETF, S&P500, China Hushen300, Korea KOSPI, Crude oil, U.S. dollar index, EUR, Net generation of electricity of all sectors in the U.S, Electricity generation in China, Average retail electricity price in the U.S. The predictive power of the 1-day lagged re- turn is stronger than all other predictors Macroeconomic variables are important for Stocks, commodities, and bonds are less effective for forecasting cryptocurrency Google searches are most effective for forecasting returns for larger The cost of mining has weak predictive effect. Target: Bitcoin, Ethereum, Ripple. Predictors: network factors (number of wallet users, active addresses, transaction count, and Payment count), and production factors (U.S. electricity price growth, net U.S. generation growth, U.S. electricity consumption growth, Cryptocurrency returns are influenced by Cryptocurrency returns are not exposed to Momentum and investor attention strongly (continued on next page) I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

August 1, 2011, to July 31, 2018. They find that Bitcoin prices are influenced by blockchain information, public attention, stock prices, commodity prices, and fiat currency prices. Guo et al. (2021) use a Wavelet Transform (WT)-Casual multi-head Attention (CA)-T- emporal Convolutional Network (TCN) and find the best forecasting performance when considering historical prices of Bitcoin, inter-exchange transaction data, and Google Trends from January 1, 2016, to December 31, 2018. Wang et al. (2022) adopt the LSTM approach to assess how investor attention impacts Bitcoin returns by constructing a comprehensive proxy for investor attention combining Google trends and tweets, as well as Bitcoin trading variables, and find that including these variables improves the pre- diction accuracy of Bitcoin returns. Liu et al. (2023) use the XGB model to forecast cryptocurrency returns using a range of different predictors, including cryptocurrencies and blockchain information variables, equities, commodities, bonds, currencies, macroeco- nomic indicators (unemployment rate, industrial production, and inflation), and Google search data for the period between April 28, 2013, and November 30, 2021. They find that the predictive power of the 1-day lagged return is stronger than that of all predictors combined. Zhong et al. (2023) propose a model combining LSTM and the Relation wise Graph Attention Network (ReGAT) to predict cryptocurrency price trends while incorporating cryptocurrency interrelations and trading volume, market capitalization, technical indicators, stock markets, commodities, fiat currencies, and Google Trends Index from March 30, 2020, to December 20, 2022. They find that the prediction performance was improved using LSTM-ReGAT compared with the linear regression, SVM, ANN, LSTM, and CNN models. Jakubik et al. (2023) focus on predicting Bitcoin returns using 980 Financial Times news articles and LSTM, CNN, and Random Forest models. They find that incorporating financial news significantly enhances the model performance during the period between September 12, 2013, and June 18, 2019, and that a trading strategy based on their proposed forecasting model is more profitable than a simple buy-and-hold strategy. Wang et al. (2023) study the volatilities predictability of Bitcoin, Ethereum, Litecoin, and Ripple using Random Forest and optimized LSTM models and find that the proposed LSTM model outperforms traditional GARCH models during the period spanning from November 1, 2017, to July 31, 2022. Cheng et al. (2024) highlight the superior performance of LSTM model, compared to Seasonal Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (SARIMA) and Facebook Prophet models, in predicting Bitcoin prices over the period spanning from January 1, 2017, to October 30, 2022. Feng et al. (2024) employ a range of economic indicators, blockchain information, indices, commodities, and Google trends from January 1, 2017, to December 31, 2022, and show Autoregressive-Realized Volatility (HAR-RV) model, with hash rate and effective federal funds rate as the best predictors. The above literature review reveals that previous studies ignore the impact of environmental variables on cryptocurrency return forecasting using ML models, do not consider the recent categorization of cryptocurrencies into green and dirty while identifying the relevant predictors, and most previous works based on ML use manual tuning and fixed parameters. Considering the predictive power of the DL and wavelet models, this study introduces a finetuned hybrid DWT-LSTM model to explore the role of each predictor among cryptocurrencies, commodities, blockchain information, Twitter-based economic uncertainty, and CO2 emissions in improving the forecasting accuracy of Bitcoin and Ripple returns. We introduce a hybrid forecasting model that optimizes the hyperparameters of the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) for each level of wavelet decomposition of the Maximum Overlapping Discrete Wavelet Transform (MODWT). Our model contributes to the previous work of Parvini et al. (2022) by finetuning the hyperparameters of the LSTM model for each level of wavelet decomposition of the the China generation growth, and Sichuan Target: Bitcoin, Ethereum, Litecoin and Ripple Predictors: Internal: lagged volatility, moving average volatility, open, high, low close prices, trading volume, trading count, and time, Blockchain, Google trend, Cryptocurrencies Fear & Greed Index. External: Adjusted close and volume of Gold, Oil, Silver, S&P 500, DJI, Russell 2000, NASDAQ, JPY-USD, USD-EUR and Policy uncertainty index. Random Forest and LSTM optimized by Genetic Algorithm and Artificial Bee Colony significantly outperform GARCH model. Internal predictors are more important in Predictors from several cryptocurrencies outperform those from a single Target: 42 kinds of primary cryptocurrencies Predictors: different stock markets, WTI crude LGBM outperforms SVM and Random Forest Predictors: cryptocurrency interrelations and trading volume, market capitalization, technical indicators, stock markets, commodities, fiat currencies, and Google trends LSTM-ReGAT provides better prediction performance compared with the linear regression, SVM, ANN, LSTM, and CNN I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

DWT. This finetuning leads to more accurate and reliable predictions by improving generalization to new data, reducing overfitting, and ensuring efficient use of computational resources (Feng et al., 2024; Yang and Shami, 2020). We apply random search cross-validation of Bergstra and Bengio (2012) to find the best values of LSTM units,2 fully connected layers,3 neurons,4 and dropout probability.5 The forecasting rounds for each decomposition were performed using LSTM, then inverse MODWT is applied to generate the predicted returns. Fig. 1 illustrates the various steps of the forecasting model. According to Fig. 1, the forecasting process is performed in three steps. First, the original data set, consisting of the desired cryptocurrency and predictors, is DWT decomposed up to six levels from D1 to D6, while S6 is the smooth subseries. Second, the LSTM model is finetuned, trained and tested on each decomposition as well as the smooth subseries (D1 to D6, and S6). Third, the inverse DWT is applied on the predicted D1 to D6, and S6 to generate the final predicted returns. 3.1. Long short-term memory (LSTM) The LSTM architecture (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997) is a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) engineered to avoid the issue of long-term dependencies. It is equipped with distinctive units known as memory blocks. Additionally, LSTM comprises several units referred to as “gates”, which regulate the transmission of information. The output of the blocks ht is calculated using a filtered function of the current state of cell Ct and ot. The output Y = {ht} is generated from an input X = {xt} for t = 1, 2, …, T employing the subsequent equations: Wf[ht−1, xt] + bf) Wi[ht−1, xt] + bi) Wc[ht−1, xt] + bc) Wo[ht−1, xt] + bo) where ⨂symbol represents an element-wise, Ct and ot are the cell states, it and ̃Ct represent potential entries for storage, W denotes the weights, b specifies the biases, σ and tanh stand for the sigmoid and hyperbolic tangent activation functions respectively. We use Adam Optimizer on mean square error (MSE) as the criterion for the loss. 3.2. Discrete wavelet transformation Wavelet transformation techniques are frequently used to improve the accuracy of time series forecasting (Ortega and Khashanah, 2014; Barunik et al., 2016; Rua, 2017; Risse, 2019; Jana et al., 2021). Let hl = {h0, h1, …, hL−1} represents the wavelet filter with length L, hl has the following characteristics: Fig. 1. : The framework of the proposed model. 2 LSTM units are artificial neurons that remember values over time intervals. 3 Fully connected layers are a fundamental component in neural networks where each neuron receives input from all neurons in the previous 4 A neuron takes a set of inputs, applies a transformation function, and produces an output. 5 Dropout probability refers to the rate at which an artificial neuron is temporarily removed from the network during the training phase. I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

Summary statistics of the selected data. S&P GSCI All Metals Bitcoin number of transactions Ripple number of transactions CO2 emissions and Twitter economic uncertainty S&P GSCI All Metals Bitcoin number of transactions Ripple number of transactions Fig. 2. : Evolution of the selected data during the period from August 01, 2018, to January 31, 2023. I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

The wavelet scaling filter gl serves as a complement to the wavelet filter hl, and has the following properties: The wavelet and scaling filters are related to each other as following: gl = ( −1)l+1hL−1+l l = 0, …, L −1 The MODWT wavelet coefficients ̃Wj,t and ̃Vj,t at level j are defined as the convolution of the time series X = {xt, t = 1, …, N −1} and are formulated as follows: where ̃hj,l = hj,l2−j/2 and ̃gj,l = gj,l2−j/2 are adjusted to length N, Lj = (2j − The MODWT wavelet coefficients at each level can be represented as follows: Hyperparameters of the proposed and benchmark models. max_depth, max_features, min_samples_leaf, min_samples_split, n_estimators max_depth, n_estimators, colsample_bytree, learning_rate, subsample colsample_bytree, learning_rate, max_depth, min_child_samples, n_estimators, subsample Fully connected layers, Fully connected neurons, Activations, Dropout probability Filters, Fully connected layers, Fully connected neurons, Dropout probability LSTM units, Fully connected layers, Fully connected neurons, Dropout probability Evaluation metrics of the different models14 Note: Training set: August 01, 2018 - June 21, 2022, Validation set: June 22, 2022 - January 31, 2023. MSE, MAE and R2 OS stand for Mean Square Error, Mean Absolute Error and the Out-of-Sample Coefficient of Determination, respectively 14 All the selected variables are used as predictors. I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

The resulting quantities are: The inverse of MODWT decomposition is: 3.3. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization Hyper-parameter optimization by random search is an efficient method to identify the optimal set of hyper-parameters for ML and DL models (Bergstra and Bengio, 2012). Unlike grid search (Burges, 1998) which systematically explores the parameter space on a fixed grid, random search randomly samples parameter values from predefined distributions, allowing to potentially cover a broader and more diverse range of the parameter space. This approach is particularly advantageous in high-dimensional spaces where exhaustive grid search becomes computationally impractical. Evaluation metrics of the predictors of Bitcoin and Ripple returns. Note: Training set: August 01, 2018 - June 21, 2022, Validation set: June 22, 2022 - January 31, 2023. MSE, MAE and R2 OS stand for Mean Square Error, Mean Absolute Error and the Out-of-Sample Coefficient of Determination, respectively I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

4. Data and empirical results Following the classification of cryptocurrencies into green and dirty cryptocurrencies (Ren and Lucey, 2022),6 we forecast Bitcoin and Ripple returns considering a broad set of predictors. Our considered list of predictors includes other cryptocurrencies to consider the systematic risk,7 commodity indices (S&P GSCI Energy, S&P GSCI All Metals, and S&P GSCI Agriculture) as proxies for the commodities markets, the Twitter-based Uncertainty Index (TEU-ENG)8 as a proxy for economic factors, blockchain information for each cryptocurrency to measure the importance of technology factors in the forecasting, and CO2 emissions9 to consider the impact of environmental factors. We selected daily data10 covering August 01, 2018, to January 31, 2023. Table 2 summarizes the descriptive statistics of the selected variables.11 The forecasting process consists of predicting one-day-ahead of Bitcoin and Ripple returns using a hybrid DWT-LSTM model developed using Tensorflow12 on Python carried on Google Colab Pro.13 We allocated 85 % of the observations in each subsample for the training and the remaining 15 % for the test. We opted for the Daubechies db3 filter (Daubechies, 1992) and set the decomposition level to six, based on the works of In and Kim (2012) and Parvini et al. (2022). In every forecasting cycle, the model employs five observations to predict one-day-ahead values. It then shifts one observation forward and repeats this process to forecast the subsequent observation. We compared the performance of the proposed model with those of the RF, XGB, LGBM, ANN, and CNN on wave- let-decomposed and non-decomposed data. We use random-search cross-validation to fine-tune the models hyperparameters. Table 3 summarizes the hyperparameters of the LSTM and other benchmark models. The search space is defined as a large grid in which each point corresponds to a specific combination of hyperparameter values. The combinations of these parameters were randomly searched to determine the optimal set of values that lead to the best performance on the validation datasets. The optimized parameters are presented in Tables A.1, A.2, A.3, and A.4 in the Appendix. Table 4 shows the evaluation metrics (MSE, MAE, R2 OS) of the proposed LSTM model and other benchmark models with both wavelet-decomposed and non-decomposed data for forecasting Bitcoin and Ripple returns. These metrics underline the performance Economic profitability of the trading strategy. Fig. 3. : Actual vs predicted returns of Bitcoin and Ripple using the best predictors. 6 Ren and Lucey (2022) argue that “proof of work” and “proof of stake” algorithms are responsible for high-and low-energy usage in mining these 7 As stated by Aslanidis et al., (2019); Ballis and Drakos, (2020); Bouri et al., (2020); Katsiampa et al., (2019a). 8 TEU-ENG consists of the total number of daily English-language tweets containing both uncertainty terms as well as economy terms. 9 The accumulation of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere resulting from the combustion of coal, oil, and natural gas. 10 Data are collected from https://bitinfocharts.com/, https://spglobal.com/, https://policyuncertainty.com/ and https://gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/ 11 Log returns are considered for the financial markets. I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

enhancement when wavelet decomposition is applied and show that our proposed hybrid DWT-LSTM model outperforms all other In fact, the additional layer of DWT to LSTM model shows the ability to capture multiscale features by effectively capturing both short-term fluctuations and long-term trends while reducing noise and redundancy. These findings align closely with the results of Wang et al. (2022), and Cheng et al. (2024) on the performance of LSTM model as time series forecasting model, and the conclusions of Parvini et al. (2022), affirming the value of integrating DWT with LSTM for robust feature extraction in time series. Table 5 summarizes the impact of the considered predictors (cryptocurrencies, commodities, blockchain information, Twitter economic uncertainty, and CO2 emissions) on the forecasting performance15 of clean and dirty cryptocurrency returns. Our results underline the comparable performance of the considered predictors, with the Twitter Economic Uncertainty index being the best predictor of Bitcoin returns and S&P GSCI Energy being the best predictor of Ripple returns. The predictive power of other crypto- currencies can be explained by the strong links between cryptocurrencies and their herding behavior (Chen et al., 2024; Bouri et al., 2022; Aslanidis et al., 2019; 2020). The predictive power of commodities can be explained by the links between cryptocurrencies and commodities (Nakagawa and Sakemoto, 2022; Sarkodie et al., 2022; Ji et al., 2019; Hayes, 2017; Bouri et al., 2017b; Jebabli et al., 2014; Baur et al., 2018; Dyhrberg, 2016a, 2016b; Qiu et al., 2021; Naeem et al., 2023). The importance of technological factors in forecasting Bitcoin and Ripple returns reinforces the findings of Balcilar et al. (2017), Guo et al. (2021), Chen et al. (2021) and Feng et al. (2024). In fact, blockchain information variables are important in cryptocurrencies pricing. A higher hash rate indicates increased miner investment and network security, whereas a larger block size enhances transaction efficiency, and the transaction volume provides information about cryptocurrencies liquidity (Balcilar et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2021). The forecasting capability of Twitter Economic Uncertainty reinforces the findings of Kraaijeveld and de Smedt (2020), Dias et al. (2022), Hajek et al. (2023), Wu et al. (2021), and Aharon et al. (2022) and can be explained by the rise in popularity of social media platforms, particularly the Twitter-based economic uncertainty. The predictive power of CO2 emissions underlines the role of environmental factors, mainly for Ripple returns forecasting, which can be explained by the lower energy consumption of Ripple compared to Bitcoin (Ren and Lucey, 2022; Pham et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2023; Clark et al., 2023). This drives investors to switch to clean cryptocurrencies when carbon emissions are high, as investors rush to support sustainable and eco-friendly options in response to environmental concerns (Duan et al., 2023; Sharif et al., 2023) as part of the ESG16 investment transition. Fig. 3 shows the actual versus predicted returns using the best predictors for Bitcoin and Ripple. The predicted and real returns align perfectly, which means that our model and the selected predictors are dynamically accurate. To check the robustness of our forecasting model, we re-evaluated the model using a different sample split (70 % for training, 30 % for testing). Despite the change in the proportion of training and testing data, the forecasting results remained unchanged (see Tables A.6, A.7 and A.8 in the Appendix). This consistency across different sample splits indicates that DWT-LSTM is robust, reliable, and insensitive to data partition. 4.3. Implications on trading To examine the implications of our returns forecasting on cryptocurrencies trading performance, we perform a trading strategy based on the forecasted returns (the trader initiates “Buy” signal at time t if the forecasted return for time t +1 is positive and opts to “Sell” otherwise). We compare this strategy with the simple “buy-and-hold approach.”17 Table 6 highlights that our trading strategy for both Bitcoin and Ripple yielded remarkable results, substantially outperforming the buy-and-hold approach, with significantly higher total returns and superior risk-adjusted performance. Our proposed strategy allows for better risk management, as evident from the considerably lower maximum drawdowns and impressive Sharpe and Sortino ratios. Additionally, Figures A.1 and A.2 in the Appendix highlight that our proposed trading strategy allows to avoid price drops and provides much higher cumulative returns in simulated trading than the buy & hold strategy. This study investigates several predictors of Bitcoin and Ripple returns (cryptocurrencies, commodities, blockchain information, Twitter eco-economic uncertainty, and CO2 emissions). We introduce a hybrid DWT-LSTM model to forecast one-day-ahead returns. Our results demonstrate that the proposed DWT-LSTM model surpasses the selected benchmark models (Random Forest (RF), XGBoost (XGB), LightGBM (LGBM), Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)) in terms of forecasting accuracy. We also highlight the comparable performance of the considered predictors, with the Twitter Economic Uncertainty index being the best predictor of Bitcoin returns, while S&P GSCI Energy is the best predictor of Ripple returns. Our findings underline the implications of forecasting Bitcoin and Ripple returns on their trading performance compared to a 15 Multivariate prediction combining several predictors is presented in Table A.5 in the Appendix. 16 ESG stands for Environmental, Social, and Governance, and it refers to a set of criteria that investors use to evaluate their investments based on their environmental and social impact, as well as their corporate governance practices. 17 “Buy and hold” is a passive strategy that produces a stable portfolio over an extended period to provide higher returns. I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

simple buy-and-hold approach. The forecasting-based strategy for Bitcoin and Ripple significantly outperformed, yielding higher total returns and better risk-adjusted performance, lower maximum drawdowns, and higher Sharpe and Sortino ratios, which underlines its usefulness as a trading support system. In the other hand, our results hold paramount importance for policymakers as they offer invaluable insights into cryptocurrency market trends. These insights aid in anticipating the potential economic and environmental factors that drive different types of cryptocurrencies to swiftly adapt policies in response to the dynamic nature of cryptocurrencies in order to enhance regulation and compliance, protect investors, develop monetary and taxation policies, foster innovation, promote international cooperation, and ensure a balanced and stable financial system. Future studies should focus on enhancing the accuracy and interpretability of the DWT–LSTM model. Exploring advanced feature engineering, such as integrating market sentiment analysis and macroeconomic indicators, can refine predictions. Data will be made available on request. Figure A.1. Cumulative returns for the portfolio implementing a trading strategy based on the best predictor of Bitcoin (Twitter Economic Un- I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

Figure A.2. Cumulative returns for the portfolio implementing a trading strategy based on the best predictor of Ripple (S&P GSCI Energy). Optimized hyperparameters of non-decomposed models (RF, XGB, LGBM) Optimized hyperparameters of non-decomposed models (ANN, LSTM, CNN) I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

Optimized hyperparameters of decomposed models (RF, XGB, LGBM) Optimized hyperparameters of decomposed models (ANN, LSTM, CNN) Evaluation metrics of some combinations of predictors of Bitcoin and Ripple returns Ripple + Stellar (Bitcoin + Stellar) Ethereum + Ripple (Bitcoin + Ethereum) Ethereum + Ripple + Stellar (Bitcoin + Ethereum + Stellar) Combination of commodity indices Agriculture + Metals + Energy Combination of all considered financial markets Ethereum + Ripple + Stellar + Agriculture + Metals + Energy Impact of the consideration of Blockchain information, Twitter Economic Uncertainty index, and CO2 emissionsa Ethereum + Ripple + Stellar + Agriculture + Metals + Energy + BI (continued on next page) I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

Ethereum + Ripple + Stellar + Agriculture + Metals + Energy + TEU Ethereum + Ripple + Stellar + Agriculture + Metals + Energy + CO2 emissions aWe consider the impact of adding each one of these variables as predictor to the combination of all selected financial markets. Training set: August 01, 2018 - June 21, 2022, Validation set: June 22, 2022 - January 31, 2023. MSE, MAE and R2 OS stand for Mean Square Error, Mean Absolute Error and the Out-of-Sample Coefficient of Determination, respectively. Evaluation metrics of the different models (70 % training, 30 % validation) Training set: August 01, 2018 - October 25, 2021, Validation set: October 26, 2021 - January 31, 2023. MSE, MAE and R2 OS stand for Mean Square Error, Mean Absolute Error and the Out-of-Sample Coefficient of Determination, respectively. Evaluation metrics of the predictors of Bitcoin and Ripple returns. (70 % training, 30 % validation) Note: Training set: August 01, 2018 - October 25, 2021, Validation set: October 26, 2021 - January 31, 2023. MSE, MAE and R2 OS stand for Mean Square Error, Mean Absolute Error and the Out-of-Sample Coefficient of Determination, respectively. Evaluation metrics of some combinations of predictors of Bitcoin and Ripple returns (70 % training, 30 % testing) Ripple + Stellar (Bitcoin + Stellar) Ethereum + Ripple (Bitcoin + Ethereum) (continued on next page) I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

Ethereum + Ripple + Stellar (Bitcoin + Ethereum + Stellar) Combination of commodity indices Agriculture + Metals + Energy Combination of all considered financial markets Ethereum + Ripple + Stellar + Agriculture + Metals + Energy Impact of the consideration of Blockchain information, Twitter Economic Uncertainty index, and CO2 emissions1 Ethereum + Ripple + Stellar + Agriculture + Metals + Energy + BI Ethereum + Ripple + Stellar + Agriculture + Metals + Energy + TEU Ethereum + Ripple + Stellar + Agriculture + Metals + Energy + CO2 emissions Training set: August 01, 2018 - October 25, 2021, Validation set: October 26, 2021 - January 31, 2023. MSE, MAE and R2 OS stand for Mean Square Error, Mean Absolute Error and the Out-of-Sample Coefficient of Determination, respectively. 1We consider the impact of adding each one of these variables as predictor to the combination of all selected financial markets. Aharon, D.Y., Demir, E., Lau, C.K.M., Zaremba, A., 2022. Twitter-Based uncertainty and cryptocurrency returns. Res. Int. Bus. Financ. 59, 101546 https://doi.org/ Arfaoui, N., Naeem, M.A., Boubaker, S., Mirza, N., Karim, S., 2023. Interdependence of clean energy and green markets with cryptocurrencies. Energy Econ. 120, Aslanidis, N., Bariviera, A.F., Martínez-Iba˜nez, O., 2019. An analysis of cryptocurrencies conditional cross correlations. Financ Res Lett. 31, 130–137. https://doi.org/ Atsalakis, G.S., Atsalaki, I.G., Pasiouras, F., Zopounidis, C., 2019. Bitcoin price forecasting with neuro-fuzzy techniques. Eur. J. Oper. Res 276, 770–780. https://doi. Balcilar, M., Bouri, E., Gupta, R., Roubaud, D., 2017. Can volume predict Bitcoin returns and volatility? A quantiles-based approach. Econ. Model 64, 74–81. Ballis, A., Drakos, K., 2020. Testing for herding in the cryptocurrency market. Financ Res Lett. 33, 101210 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2019.06.008. Barunik, J., Krehlik, T., Vacha, L., 2016. Modeling and forecasting exchange rate volatility in time-frequency domain. Eur. J. Oper. Res 251, 329–340. https://doi.org/ Baur, D.G., Dimpfl, T., Kuck, K., 2018. Bitcoin, gold and the US dollar – a replication and extension. Financ Res Lett. 25, 103–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Burges, C.J.C., 1998. A tutorial on support vector machines for pattern recognition. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 2 (2) https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1009715923555. Bergstra, J., Bengio, Y., 2012. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 13. Bouri, E., Christou, C., Gupta, R., 2022. Forecasting returns of major cryptocurrencies: evidence from regime-switching factor models. Financ Res Lett. 49, 103193 Bouri, E., Das, M., Gupta, R., Roubaud, D., 2018a. Spillovers between Bitcoin and other assets during bear and bull markets. Appl. Econ. 50, 5935–5949. https://doi. Bouri, E., Gupta, R., Lahiani, A., Shahbaz, M., 2018b. Testing for asymmetric nonlinear short- and long-run relationships between bitcoin, aggregate commodity and gold prices. Resour. Policy 57, 224–235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2018.03.008. Bouri, E., Gupta, R., Tiwari, A.K., Roubaud, D., 2017a. Does Bitcoin hedge global uncertainty? Evidence from wavelet-based quantile-in-quantile regressions. Financ Res Lett. 23, 87–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2017.02.009. Bouri, E., Jalkh, N., Moln´ar, P., Roubaud, D., 2017b. Bitcoin for energy commodities before and after the December 2013 crash: diversifier, hedge or safe haven? Appl. Bouri, E., Roubaud, D., Shahzad, S.J.H., 2020. Do Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies jump together? Q. Rev. Econ. Financ. 76, 396–409. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Catania, L., Grassi, S., Ravazzolo, F., 2019. Forecasting cryptocurrencies under model and parameter instability. Int J. Forecast 35, 485–501. https://doi.org/10.1016/ Chaim, P., Laurini, M.P., 2018. Volatility and return jumps in bitcoin. Econ. Lett. 173, 158–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2018.10.011. Chen, W., Xu, H., Jia, L., Gao, Y., 2021. Machine learning model for Bitcoin exchange rate prediction using economic and technology determinants. Int J. Forecast 37, Chen, Y., Zhang, L., Bouri, E., 2024. Co-Bubble transmission across clean and dirty Cryptocurrencies: network and portfolio analysis. J. Int Money Financ. 145, Cheng, J., Tiwari, S., Khaled, D., Mahendru, M., Shahzad, U., 2024. Forecasting Bitcoin prices using artificial intelligence: combination of ML, SARIMA, and Facebook Prophet models. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 198, 122938. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2023.122938. Clark, E., Lahiani, A., Mefteh-Wali, S., 2023. Cryptocurrency return predictability: what is the role of the environment? Technol. Forecast Soc. Change 189, 122350. Cong, L.W., He, Z., 2019. Blockchain disruption and smart contracts. Rev. Financ Stud. 32, 1754–1797. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhz007. Daubechies, I., 1992. Ten Lectures on Wavelets. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.Daubechies, I., 1992. Ten Lectures on Wavelets. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611970104. Demir, E., Gozgor, G., Lau, C.K.M., Vigne, S.A., 2018. Does economic policy uncertainty predict the Bitcoin returns? An empirical investigation. Financ Res Lett. 26, Dias, I.K., Fernando, J.M.R., Fernando, P.N.D., 2022. Does investor sentiment predict bitcoin return and volatility? A quantile regression approach. Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 84, 102383 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.irfa.2022.102383. Duan, K., Zhao, Y., Urquhart, A., Huang, Y., 2023. Do clean and dirty cryptocurrencies connect with financial assets differently? The role of economic policy uncertainty. Energy Econ. 127, 107079 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2023.107079. Dyhrberg, A.H., 2016a. Hedging capabilities of bitcoin. Is it the virtual gold? Financ Res Lett. 16, 139–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2015.10.025. Dyhrberg, A.H., 2016b. Bitcoin, gold and the dollar – a GARCH volatility analysis. Financ Res Lett. 16, 85–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2015.10.008. I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

Feng, L., Qi, J., Lucey, B., 2024. Enhancing cryptocurrency market volatility forecasting with daily dynamic tuning strategy. Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 94, 103239 Gradojevic, N., Kukolj, D., Adcock, R., Djakovic, V., 2021. Forecasting Bitcoin with technical analysis: a not-so-random forest? Int J. Forecast. https://doi.org/ Guo, H., Zhang, D., Liu, S., Wang, L., Ding, Y., 2021. Bitcoin price forecasting: a perspective of underlying blockchain transactions. Decis. Support Syst. 151, 113650 Hafner, C.M., 2018. Testing for bubbles in cryptocurrencies with time-varying volatility. J. Financ. Econ. https://doi.org/10.1093/jjfinec/nby023. Hajek, P., Hikkerova, L., Sahut, J.-M., 2023. How well do investor sentiment and ensemble learning predict Bitcoin prices? Res Int Bus. Financ. 64, 101836 https:// Hansen, P.R., Lunde, A., 2005. A forecast comparison of volatility models: does anything beat a GARCH(1,1)? J. Appl. Econ. 20, 873–889. https://doi.org/10.1002/ Hayes, A.S., 2017. Cryptocurrency value formation: an empirical study leading to a cost of production model for valuing bitcoin. Telemat. Inform. 34, 1308–1321. Hochreiter, S., Schmidhuber, J., 1997. Long short-term memory. Neural Comput. 9, 1735–1780. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735. In, F., Kim, S., 2012. An Introduction to Wavelet Theory in Finance. World Scientific. https://doi.org/10.1142/8431. Jakubik, J., Nazemi, A., Geyer-Schulz, A., Fabozzi, F.J., 2023. Incorporating financial news for forecasting Bitcoin prices based on long short-term memory networks. Quant. Financ. 23, 335–349. https://doi.org/10.1080/14697688.2022.2130085. Jana, R.K., Ghosh, I., Das, D., 2021. A differential evolution-based regression framework for forecasting Bitcoin price. Ann. Oper. Res 306, 295–320. https://doi.org/ Jebabli, I., Arouri, M., Teulon, F., 2014. On the effects of world stock market and oil price shocks on food prices: an empirical investigation based on TVP-VAR models with stochastic volatility. Energy Econ. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2014.06.008. Ji, Q., Bouri, E., Roubaud, D., Kristoufek, L., 2019. Information interdependence among energy, cryptocurrency and major commodity markets. Energy Econ. 81, Katsiampa, P., 2017. Volatility estimation for Bitcoin: a comparison of GARCH models. Econ. Lett. 158, 3–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2017.06.023. Katsiampa, P., Corbet, S., Lucey, B., 2019a. High frequency volatility co-movements in cryptocurrency markets. J. Int. Financ. Mark., Inst. Money 62, 35–52. https:// Kraaijeveld, O., de Smedt, J., 2020. The predictive power of public Twitter sentiment for forecasting cryptocurrency prices. J. Int. Financ. Mark., Inst. Money 65, Kristoufek, L., 2013. BitCoin meets google trends and wikipedia: quantifying the relationship between phenomena of the Internet era. Sci. Rep. 3, 3415. https://doi. Kristoufek, L., 2015. What are the main drivers of the bitcoin price? Evidence from wavelet coherence analysis. PLoS One 10, e0123923. https://doi.org/10.1371/ Kubal, J., Kristoufek, L., 2022. Exploring the relationship between Bitcoin price and network’s hashrate within endogenous system. Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 84, 102375 Li, J., Yuan, Y., Wang, F.-Y., 2019. A novel GSP auction mechanism for ranking Bitcoin transactions in blockchain mining. Decis. Support Syst. 124, 113094 https:// Li, X., Wang, C.A., 2017. The technology and economic determinants of cryptocurrency exchange rates: the case of Bitcoin. Decis. Support Syst. 95, 49–60. https://doi. Liu, Y., Li, Z., Nekhili, R., Sultan, J., 2023. Forecasting cryptocurrency returns with machine learning. Res. Int. Bus. Financ. 64, 101905 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Liu, Y., Tsyvinski, A., 2021. Risks and returns of cryptocurrency. Rev. Financ Stud. 34, 2689–2727. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhaa113. Ly´ocsa, ˇS., Moln´ar, P., Plíhal, T., ˇSiraˇnov´a, M., 2020. Impact of macroeconomic news, regulation and hacking exchange markets on the volatility of bitcoin. J. Econ. Dyn. Control 119, 103980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jedc.2020.103980. Mai, F., Shan, Z., Bai, Q., Wang, X. (Shane), Chiang, R.H.L., 2018. How does social media impact bitcoin value? A test of the silent majority hypothesis. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 35, 19–52. https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2018.1440774. Naeem, M.A., Karim, S., 2021. Tail dependence between bitcoin and green financial assets. Econ. Lett. 208, 110068 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2021.110068. Naeem, M.A., Karim, S., Abrar, A., Yarovaya, L., Shah, A.A., 2023. Non-linear relationship between oil and cryptocurrencies: evidence from returns and shocks. Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 89, 102769 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.irfa.2023.102769. Nakagawa, K., Sakemoto, R., 2022. Market uncertainty and correlation between Bitcoin and Ether. Financ Res Lett. 50, 103216 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Ortega, L., Khashanah, K., 2014. A neuro-wavelet model for the short-term forecasting of high-frequency time series of stock returns. J. Forecast 33, 134–146. https:// Parvini, N., Abdollahi, M., Seifollahi, S., Ahmadian, D., 2022. Forecasting Bitcoin returns with long short-term memory networks and wavelet decomposition: a comparison of several market determinants. Appl. Soft Comput. 121, 108707. Pham, L., Karim, S., Naeem, M.A., Long, C., 2022. A tale of two tails among carbon prices, green and non-green cryptocurrencies. Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 82, 102139 Polasik, M., Piotrowska, A.I., Wisniewski, T.P., Kotkowski, R., Lightfoot, G., 2015. Price fluctuations and the use of bitcoin: an empirical inquiry. Int. J. Electron. Commer. 20, 9–49. https://doi.org/10.1080/10864415.2016.1061413. Qiu, Y., Wang, Y., Xie, T., 2021. Forecasting Bitcoin realized volatility by measuring the spillover effect among cryptocurrencies. Econ. Lett. 208, 110092 https://doi. Ren, B., Lucey, B., 2022. A clean, green haven? Examining the relationship between clean energy, clean and dirty cryptocurrencies. Energy Econ. 109, 105951 https:// Risse, M., 2019. Combining wavelet decomposition with machine learning to forecast gold returns. Int J Forecast 35, 601–615. Int J Forecast 35, 601–615. https://doi. Rua, A., 2017. A wavelet-based multivariate multiscale approach for forecasting. Int J. Forecast 33, 581–590. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijforecast.2017.01.007. Salisu, A.A., Ndako, U.B., Vo, X.V., 2023. Oil price and the Bitcoin market. Resour. Policy 82, 103437. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2023.103437. Sarkodie, S.A., Ahmed, M.Y., Owusu, P.A., 2022. COVID-19 pandemic improves market signals of cryptocurrencies–evidence from bitcoin, bitcoin cash, ethereum, and litecoin. Financ Res Lett. 44, 102049 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2021.102049. Sharif, A., Brahim, M., Dogan, E., Tzeremes, P., 2023. Analysis of the spillover effects between green economy, clean and dirty cryptocurrencies. Energy Econ. 120, Sun, X., Liu, M., Sima, Z., 2020. A novel cryptocurrency price trend forecasting model based on LightGBM. Financ Res Lett. 32, 101084 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Wang, Y., Andreeva, G., Martin-Barragan, B., 2023. Machine learning approaches to forecasting cryptocurrency volatility: considering internal and external determinants. Int. Rev. Financ. Anal. 90, 102914 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.irfa.2023.102914. Wang, C., Shen, D., Li, Y., 2022. Aggregate investor attention and bitcoin return: the long short-term memory networks perspective. Financ Res Lett. 49, 103143 Wu, W., Tiwari, A.K., Gozgor, G., Leping, H., 2021. Does economic policy uncertainty affect cryptocurrency markets? Evidence from Twitter-based uncertainty measures. Res Int Bus. Financ. 58, 101478 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ribaf.2021.101478. I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

Xie, P., Chen, H., Hu, Y.J., 2020. Signal or noise in social media discussions: the role of network cohesion in predicting the bitcoin market. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 37, Yang, L., Shami, A., 2020. On hyperparameter optimization of machine learning algorithms: theory and practice. Neurocomputing 415, 295–316. https://doi.org/ Yousaf, I., Riaz, Y., Goodell, J.W., 2023. Energy cryptocurrencies: assessing connectedness with other asset classes. Financ. Res. Lett. 52 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Zhang, D., Chen, X.H., Lau, C.K.M., Xu, B., 2023. Implications of cryptocurrency energy usage on climate change. Technol. Forecast Soc. Change 187, 122219. https:// Zhong, C., Du, W., Xu, W., Huang, Q., Zhao, Y., Wang, M., 2023. LSTM-ReGAT: a network-centric approach for cryptocurrency price trend prediction. Decis. Support Syst. 169, 113955 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2023.113955. I. Jirou et al. Research in International Business and Finance 73 (2025) 102575

---NEW PAPER---

Academic Editor: Gianluca Lax Received: 18 December 2024 Revised: 31 January 2025 Accepted: 31 January 2025 Published: 11 February 2025 Citation: Alnami, H.; Mohzary, M.; Assiri, B.; Zangoti, H. An Integrated Framework for Cryptocurrency Price Forecasting and Anomaly Detection Using Machine Learning. Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 1864. https://doi.org/ Copyright: © 2025 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license An Integrated Framework for Cryptocurrency Price Forecasting and Anomaly Detection Using Machine Learning , Muhammad Mohzary 1,2 , Basem Assiri 1 and Hussein Zangoti 3 Department of Computer Science, Jazan University, Jazan 82817, Saudi Arabia; mmohzary@jazanu.edu.sa (M.M.); babumussmar@jazanu.edu.sa (B.A.) Engineering and Technology Research Center, Jazan University, P.O. Box 114, Jazan 82817, Saudi Arabia Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Jazan University, Jazan 82817, Saudi Arabia; Abstract: The accurate prediction of cryptocurrency prices is crucial due to the volatil- ity and complexity of digital asset markets, which pose significant challenges to traders, investors, and researchers. This research addresses these challenges by leveraging ma- chine learning and deep learning techniques to forecast closing prices for cryptocurrencies, focusing on Bitcoin, Ethereum, Binance Coin, and Litecoin cryptocurrency datasets. A Ran- dom Forest ensemble learning algorithm, a Gradient Boosting model, and a feedforward neural network were implemented to handle the complexities in cryptocurrency data. A Z-Score-based anomaly detection framework was integrated to classify closing prices as normal or abnormal, aiding in identifying significant market events. Evaluation metrics, such as the Mean Squared Error (MSE), Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), Mean Absolute Error (MAE), and R-squared (R²), demonstrate the superior precision and reliability of the Random Forest and Gradient Boosting models. The deep learning model indicates strong generalization capabilities, suggesting potential advantages on more complex datasets. These findings highlight the importance of combining advanced machine learning tech- niques and cryptocurrencies to develop a robust framework for cryptocurrency forecasting Keywords: cryptocurrency prediction; abnormal close price prediction; machine learning Cryptocurrency markets have gained significant attention worldwide because they could change how we handle money. These digital assets are also known for their ups and downs in price, making them attractive but risky [1–4]. The ups and downs of cryptocurrency attract many investors, but they come with both big chances and serious risks. Because prices can change quickly, it is essential to create good models that predict these price changes. These models help reduce risks, support better decision making, and spot new trends in the market [5–7]. Traditional financial forecasting techniques frequently struggle to effectively rep- resent cryptocurrencies’ complex price fluctuations. These fluctuations are affected by multiple factors, such as non-linear dynamics, changes in external sentiment, and vari- ous elements inherent to the blockchain [8–12]. As a result, the drawbacks of traditional methods have prompted the development of state-of-the-art machine learning and deep learning techniques. These approaches have demonstrated effectiveness in addressing and Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 1864

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 1864 understanding the complex challenges of predicting the cryptocurrency market, providing a more advanced analytical tool for investors and financial analysts. This study contributes to the existing knowledge base by integrating machine learning and deep learning to forecast cryptocurrencies’ closing prices and identify irregular market trends. This study used historical price data and essential market features such as trading volume and capitalization to develop robust predictive models. By leveraging Random Forest and Gradient Boosting algorithms, along with a feedforward neural network, this research addressed the non-linear patterns and dynamic nature of cryptocurrency data. Furthermore, an anomaly detection framework based on Z-Scores was incorporated to classify closing prices as normal or abnormal, allowing the identification of significant market events that could impact trading strategies. A fundamental aspect of this research is enhancing cryptocurrencies by enabling early and transparent decisions based on accurate prediction, which helps to prevent or minimize harmful situations. This approach ensures the clarity, immutability, and real- time accessibility of abnormal trading data, thereby enhancing the reliability and utility of the predictive framework. This investigation provides a comprehensive solution for cryptocurrency price forecasting, anomaly detection, and market analysis. By addressing existing limitations in traditional financial forecasting methods, this research contributes to advancing the field of cryptocurrency analytics and offers practical insights for stakeholders in the digital asset ecosystem. The key contributions of this research are summarized as follows: Integration of Advanced Technologies: A robust framework combines machine learn- ing, deep learning, and cryptocurrency to improve price prediction and anomaly detection while ensuring transparency and data immutability. Robust Predictive Models: This research utilizes Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, and feedforward neural network models to tackle non-linear behaviors and evolving patterns in cryptocurrency data. It incorporates features such as trading volume and market capitalization to improve the accuracy of the models. Anomaly Detection Framework: A Z-score-based mechanism classifies closing prices as normal or abnormal, providing insights into significant market events to support trading strategies and risk management. Advancement of Cryptocurrency Analytics: This research offers practical tools for stakeholders to tackle the challenges of the cryptocurrency market by overcoming the limitations of traditional forecasting methods. Several studies have utilized traditional machine learning algorithms to predict cryp- tocurrency prices. Linear regression (LR) models have been commonly applied to forecast Bitcoin’s closing price using critical market features, as demonstrated in [5]. Additionally, other studies have employed LR and support vector machines (SVMs), along with sliding window techniques, to predict daily Bitcoin prices [13]. In [14], Chen et al. used high- dimensional feature classification models to predict daily price movements. Meanwhile, ensemble learning methods, including Random Forests, have been widely applied. For example, ref. [15] used random forest models to predict Bitcoin’s closing price, outper- forming models like LR and K-nearest neighbors (KNN). Furthermore, ensemble learning methods, such as gradient boosting, have demonstrated superior performance in cryptocur- rency forecasting using XGBoost and LightGBM [7]. Moreover, ref. [16] employed several machine learning models, such as recurrent neural networks and tree-based ensembles, to predict the daily movements of more than 100 cryptocurrencies with an accuracy of 59.5% at most. Additionally, a recent study [17] forecasted Ethereum (ETH) price and trends by

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 1864 applying Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) models for price predictions and support vector machines (SVM) for trend classification. The authors achieved a return factor of up to 5.16%. Time-series forecasting approaches have also been employed in cryptocurrency price prediction. Traditional econometric models like auto-regressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) have been compared with deep learning models. For example, Rebane et al. [18] compared ARIMA with recurrent neural network (RNN)-based seq2seq models and found that neural networks outperformed ARIMA. Additionally, ARIMA models have been applied alongside modern techniques such as FBProphet and XGBoost for predicting fluc- tuations in Bitcoin prices, as demonstrated in [19]. The results indicated that ARIMA achieved the lowest error rates, making it a strong candidate for cryptocurrency time- series forecasting. Econometric time-series models like Auto-Regressive Conditional Het- eroskedasticity (ARCH) [20] and Generalized Auto-Regressive Conditional Heteroskedas- ticity (GARCH) [21] handle heteroskedasticity (non-constant variance) over time to simulate volatility. In addition, Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) [22] has also been used to forecast non-stationary series. Together, these methods form some of the most modern time-series forecasting models [23]. Deep learning algorithms, particularly recurrent neural networks (RNNs), have shown impressive results in cryptocurrency price forecasting. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks have been a popular choice for handling time-series data due to their ability to capture temporal dependencies. Several studies have applied LSTM networks to predict cryptocurrency prices, outperforming traditional machine learning models. For instance, an LSTM model achieved superior accuracy over linear regression in [5], and other studies have utilized LSTM to predict daily cryptocurrency prices [18]. Moreover, Sezer et al. applied Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to time-series data, transforming price trends into 2D images, which helped capture short-term price dependencies [24]. Addition- ally, Zhang et al. demonstrated the potential of transformer models like BERT and GPT for price prediction, showing that transformers outperformed RNNs by capturing both short- and long-term dependencies [25]. Hybrid models that combine traditional and deep learning methods have also been proposed for cryptocurrency price prediction. For example, Chong et al. developed a hybrid ARIMA-LSTM model to combine linear and non-linear trends in price data, demon- strating improved accuracy in price forecasting [1]. Similarly, in [6], researchers integrated various cryptocurrency data sources to predict Ethereum prices using advanced machine learning techniques. These models have been shown to benefit from both traditional econometric and modern neural network features. Another research evaluated the use of machine learning in predicting price volatility for cryptocurrency [26]. It compared the performances of linear regression, decision trees, support vector machines, and neural networks, showing promising results in price prediction based on the US financial market. Another study investigated the performance of Gradient Boosting, Random Forest, and Bagging in predicting the prices of cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin, Ethereum, Binance, USD, and others. The work showed that Gradient Boosting outperforms the other machine learning models in some currencies, while Random Forest outperforms them in other currencies [27]. More studies confirm the effectiveness of the Random Forest regression algorithm in cryptocurrency price prediction [28–30]. Indeed, several works have focused on a specific cryptocurrency such as Bitcoin to be the base model that can be generalized [30–34]. While others have expanded the research to include more cryptocurrencies [35,36].

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 1864 3. Methodology and Architecture This research examined the closing prices of cryptocurrencies—specifically Bitcoin (BTC), Ethereum (ETH), Binance Coin (BNB), and Litecoin (LTC)—utilizing a Random Forest machine learning algorithm. As demonstrated in Figure 1, the proposed method- ology for forecasting closing prices adopts a multi-stage approach that integrates data transformation, machine learning, and cryptocurrencies. Historical price data were initially sourced from various platforms, including stock exchanges and financial APIs. Following data collection, this dataset underwent preprocessing to ensure its quality and relevance, involving cleaning, normalizing, and transforming data into an appropriate format for analysis. Additionally, key features such as trading volume and market capitalization were engineered to enhance the accuracy of the predictive model. Figure 1. Proposed methodology. Once the dataset was prepared, the ensemble machine learning algorithm was created to forecast prices. The Random Forest algorithm was chosen for its robustness against overfitting and adeptness at handling non-linear relationships [37]. To determine the model’s effectiveness, metrics such as the Mean Absolute Error and Root Mean Squared Error were utilized to evaluate its predictive accuracy. The methodology employs an anomaly detection framework to identify normal versus abnormal closing price scenarios. Predicted closing prices were consistently compared to actual closing prices to create a baseline of expected behavior. This involved calculating the standard deviation of the predicted closing prices to set a threshold for categorizing them. Specifically, a threshold was defined as the mean plus or minus one standard deviation, allowing predicted closing prices to be classified as either normal or abnormal. Furthermore, statistical tools like Z-scores were used to further classify predictions into normal (within an acceptable range) and abnormal (outliers) categories. Abnormal cases may signal significant market events or anomalies that should be investigated, while typical cases reflect standard market variations. The acceptable Z-score range was from −1 to 1 percent, so if the predicted closing price for the next day lied within this range, it was deemed normal; otherwise, it was classified as abnormal. 4. Dataset Description and Preprocessing In the initial phase, data collection involved gathering historical data from reliable cryptocurrency exchanges, such as Bitcoin (BTC), Ethereum (ETH), Binance Coin (BNB),

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 1864 and Litecoin (LTC). We included these cryptocurrencies to capture a broad spectrum of market conditions, volatility, and different use cases. Bitcoin serves as the market bench- mark with the largest market capitalization, and Ethereum serves as that with the second market capitalization that supports smart contracts technology. Binance Coin illustrates an exchange-based utility token, and Litecoin offers fast and lightweight transactions [38]. These varied digital assets provide robust historical data and diverse market dynamics that can enable comprehensive evaluations of price forecasting and anomaly detection. The dataset encompasses critical features, including closing prices, opening prices, high and low prices, trading volume, and market capitalization. The data collection time frame spanned 2015 until 2021 to ensure a comprehensive analysis of price trends [39]. The following are brief descriptions of the dataset’s features: Date: Represents the observation date and serves as the dataset’s temporal index. Open: Captures the opening price of the cryptocurrency, reflecting the first transaction at the start of the trading day. High: Denotes the highest price achieved within the selected time frame, providing insight into market volatility on the date. Low: Represents the lowest price traded during the interval, helping assess the minimum demand and price fluctuation range compared to the high feature. Close (Target): Records the final price at the end of the day. Volume: Indicates the total of cryptocurrency units traded. Higher volumes suggest greater market interest, while lower volumes may indicate uncertainty. Market Cap: Calculated as the closing price times circulating supply, it measures the cryptocurrency’s overall market value, used for ranking. A higher market cap suggests stability; a lower one may indicate riskier investments. Following data collection, preprocessing steps were undertaken to enhance the dataset’s quality. This process includes data cleaning to address missing values and duplicates. Feature engineering also uses correlation feature selection to determine vari- ables that could improve model performance, such as volume and market capitalization, as presented in Figure 2. Additionally, the standard scaler preprocessing technique was employed to normalize all cryptocurrency datasets, adjusting them to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. This step is essential for enhancing the effectiveness of machine learning algorithms [40]. The threshold value for labeling abnormal values is derived from the Z-Score, a statistical measure that quantifies the number of standard deviations a data point is from the mean of a dataset. The Z-Score is calculated using a rolling window approach, where a rolling mean and standard deviation are computed over a specified period (in this case, 30 days). This ensures that the Z-Score dynamically adjusts to local trends and variations in the data, making it suitable for time-series analysis. The decision to use a 30-day rolling window aims to balance the identification of medium-term trends and outliers while reducing the noise from short-term fluctuations. This time frame corresponds with the typical expectation that financial market patterns may display cyclical trends over monthly periods. We acknowledge that this window size might not adequately represent sudden changes. Consequently, additional tests were performed using rolling windows of 15 and 7 days to assess their effects on the results. We recalculated the rolling mean and standard deviation for these new window sizes and analyzed how these changes impacted the Z-Score, anomaly detection, and overall model performance.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 1864 Figure 2. Correlation metrics. Algorithm 1 identifies abnormal data points based on their deviation from recent trends using a financial instrument’s closing prices C(t). The analysis was carried out by computing rolling statistics and normalizing the data using the Z-Score. The algorithm relies on three key components: the rolling mean µ(t), rolling standard deviation σ(t), and Z-Score Z(t). The rolling mean µ(t) represents the local average of the time-series data over a specified window size w, smoothing short-term fluctuations to highlight longer-term trends. Similarly, the rolling standard deviation σ(t) quantifies the dispersion of the data around the rolling mean, capturing the variability within the same window. Using these rolling statistics, the algorithm adapts to local trends and avoids the influence of earlier data, which might no longer be relevant. The Z-Score Z(t) is a normalized measure that quantifies the deviation of a data point from the rolling mean in units of the rolling standard deviation. This normalization enables a consistent comparison of deviations across different points in time, even when the scale or variability of the data changes. The algorithm detects abnormalities by evaluating whether the absolute value of the Z-Score exceeds a predefined threshold zthreshold. Data points for which |Z(t)| > zthreshold are flagged as abnormal, and an abnormality indicator A(t) is assigned a value of 1, while normal points are assigned a value of 0. This approach allows for the detection of significant deviations, regardless of whether they are above or below the rolling mean. The rolling window approach ensures that the algorithm is sensitive to recent data, making it well suited for applications where trends and patterns evolve over time. Common use cases include financial data analysis, where sudden price movements can signal market anomalies, or sensor data monitoring, in which deviations may indicate faults or unusual events. However, the method requires sufficient data points within the rolling window to provide reliable statistics, and the presence of outliers within the window may influence the computed rolling mean and Overall, the algorithm provides a robust framework for anomaly detection. It en- sures adaptability across various domains and datasets by leveraging local statistics The dataset was then divided into training and testing subsets, allocating approxi- mately 80% of the data for training and 20% for testing to validate the model’s performance.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 1864 Algorithm 1 Calculate Z-Score and detect abnormalities in cryptocurrency data C(t): Time-series data of closing prices. w: Rolling window size (w = 30). zthreshold: Z-Score threshold (zthreshold = 1). µ(t): Rolling mean of C(t). σ(t): Rolling standard deviation of C(t). Z(t): Z-Score of C(t). A(t): Abnormality indicator; A(t) = 1 if |Z(t)| > zthreshold, otherwise A(t) = 0. 1: Step 1: Calculate Rolling Mean 2: for each time point t in C(t) do Compute the rolling mean µ(t) over a window of size w: 5: Step 2: Calculate Rolling Standard Deviation 6: for each time point t in C(t) do Compute the rolling standard deviation σ(t): 9: Step 3: Calculate Z-Score 10: for each time point t in C(t) do Compute the Z-Score Z(t): Z(t) = C(t) −µ(t) 13: Step 4: Identify Abnormalities 14: for each time point t in C(t) do if |Z(t)| > zthreshold then Set A(t) = 1 {Mark as abnormal} Set A(t) = 0 {Normal point} 5. Modeling and Evaluation In financial forecasting, accurately predicting cryptocurrency prices is crucial due to the volatile and dynamic characteristics of digital assets. This study investigated the use of machine learning and deep learning models to forecast closing prices of cryptocurrencies, specifically emphasizing Random Forest and feedforward neural network techniques. Both models were assessed for their capacity to manage the complexities and non-linear trends present in financial datasets, utilizing important features like ‘Volume’ and ‘Marketcap’ for prediction. The methodologies along with their implementation details are provided below. This study employed the Random Forest (RF) model and Gradient Boosting (GB) regressor to predict the closing prices of various cryptocurrencies, including Binance, Ethereum, and Litecoin. The RF model is a robust ensemble learning algorithm frequently utilized for regression and classification, recognized for its ability to handle non-linear

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 1864 relationships and reduce overfitting. It operates by creating 100 decision trees during the training phase and consolidating their predictions to achieve a more accurate and reliable result. Key input features, such as “Volume” and “Marketcap”, were used for model training, with the target variable being the “Close” price. Conversely, the GB regressor constructs trees sequentially, with each tree addressing the residual errors of the previous one. This iterative refinement process renders Gradient Boosting especially adept at detecting complex patterns and attaining high accuracy in numerous regression tasks. Both models were trained on 80% of the dataset, with predictions evaluated on the remaining 20% of the test set. To measure accuracy and reliability, we calculated metrics, including the Mean Squared Error, the Root Mean Squared Error, the Mean Absolute Error, and R-squared [41]. The following are the descriptions of each metric: Mean Squared Error (MSE) n: Total number of data points. yi: Actual value of the i-th data point. ˆyi: Predicted value of the i-th data point. (yi −ˆyi)2: Squared difference between the actual and predicted values. The MSE measures the average of the squared differences between predicted and actual values, emphasizing larger errors. Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) n: Total number of data points. yi: Actual value of the i-th data point. ˆyi: Predicted value of the i-th data point. (yi −ˆyi)2: Squared difference between the actual and predicted values. The RMSE is the square root of the MSE and provides an error measure in the same units as the target variable. Mean Absolute Error (MAE) n: Total number of data points. yi: Actual value of the i-th data point. ˆyi: Predicted value of the i-th data point. |yi −ˆyi|: Absolute difference between the actual and predicted values. MAE measures the average magnitude of errors without considering their direction. R2 = 1 −∑n n: Total number of data points. yi: Actual value of the i-th data point. ˆyi: Predicted value of the i-th data point.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 1864 ¯y: Mean of all actual values. i=1(yi −ˆyi)2: Sum of squared residuals (errors). i=1(yi −¯y)2: Total sum of squares (variance in the actual data). R² measures the proportion of the variance in the actual data that the model explains. It ranges from 0 to 1, with higher values indicating better model performance. This analysis utilizes a deep learning model featuring a feedforward neural network to forecast the closing prices of Binance cryptocurrency, using crucial features like “Volume” and “Marketcap”. To enhance the model’s performance, input features were standardized with a StandardScaler, normalizing the data to a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, which aids convergence in training. The neural network was built with the Keras Sequential API and included three hidden layers containing 64, 32, and 16 units, each applying the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function to identify non-linear patterns. The output layer is a sole neuron with a linear activation function specifically designed for regression tasks. The model employs the Adam optimizer, which is recognized for its adaptive learning rate. To reduce prediction errors, the loss function was set to Mean Squared Error (MSE). During training, the model was fit for 40 epochs with a batch size of 32, and validation data were used to evaluate its performance. 6. Results and Discussion The evaluation results for the Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, and Deep Learning models show unique strengths in predicting cryptocurrency prices across various datasets. Figure 3 illustrates the RMSE and MAE outcomes for the three models—Random Forest, Deep Learning, and Gradient Boosting—applied to four cryptocurrency datasets: Binance, Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Litecoin. Since all RMSE and MAE values are below 0.15, this indicates that all models perform with a high degree of accuracy, regardless of the variations in metric values among the models. Figure 3. RMSE and MAE results for all the models utilized. On the Binance dataset, all three models show low RMSE and MAE values, indi- cating precise performance. RF and GB yield nearly identical results, highlighting their effectiveness in capturing the underlying patterns of Binance’s market data. Although Deep Learning presents slightly higher error values than the other models, it still attains

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 1864 metrics very close to zero, affirming its capacity to model Binance’s relatively stable market On the Bitcoin dataset, all models delivered precise predictions, reflected in their low RMSE and MAE values. While Deep Learning exhibits higher error rates than Random Forest and GB, these errors are still minor, indicating the model’s dependable performance. Random Forest and GB present slightly lower errors, highlighting their strength in grasping the complexities of Bitcoin’s volatile market. Nevertheless, the substantial fact that all errors are well below 0.15 confirms that each model is capable of accurately predicting The models for the Ethereum dataset again demonstrate high accuracy. Both Random Forest and GB achieve low, comparable RMSE and MAE values, highlighting their strong predictive power for Ethereum’s market. Although Deep Learning shows slightly higher error metrics, these figures remain close to zero, indicating that the model accurately reflects Ethereum’s price trends. The overall low metric values across all models signify that Ethereum’s market is highly predictable, despite minor variations in error. All models exhibit consistent accuracy on the Litecoin dataset, reflected in their low RMSE and MAE values. Although Deep Learning records the highest error rates, the values are still comfortably below 0.15, indicating that the model is capable of delivering dependable predictions. Both Random Forest and GB attain low error rates and show marginally better performance, showcasing their ability to adapt to Litecoin’s market trends. Despite variations in error rates, all models attain near-zero metrics, underlining their precision and reliability in forecasting Litecoin prices. Table 1 compares the performances of all the algorithms across the four datasets. Performance was evaluated using the MSE, RMSE, MAE, and (R2). Below is a detailed analysis of the models for each dataset. Table 1. Performance metrics for Random Forest (RF), Gradient Boosting (GB), and Deep Learning (DL) models on all the datasets. All three models performed remarkably well on the Binance dataset, achieving MSE values that are nearly zero and R2 values close to 1. Both RF and GB exhibit an MSE of 0.0001 and an R2 of 0.9998, showing that they can predict Binance prices with nearly perfect accuracy. Meanwhile, DL has a slightly higher MSE of 0.0002 and an R2 of 0.9996, indicating a minor decrease in its ability to fit the data compared to RF and GB. Nevertheless, the differences are negligible, and all models exhibit outstanding accuracy for this dataset. On the Ethereum dataset, RF surpasses the other models with an MSE of 0.0002 and an R2 of 0.9995, highlighting its effectiveness in capturing the data’s underlying patterns.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 1864 GB follows closely with a slightly higher MSE of 0.0004 and an R2 of 0.9993, demonstrating strong performance but falling just short of RF. Conversely, DL shows an increase in MSE to 0.0042 and a lower R2 of 0.9937; nonetheless, these results remain highly accurate. For Litecoin, RF delivers the strongest performance, achieving an MSE of 0.0025 and an R2 of 0.9972. This signifies highly accurate predictions and an excellent fit to the data. Following closely is GB, which records an MSE of 0.0032 and an R2 of 0.9963, slightly trailing RF yet still performing admirably. DL, on the other hand, exhibits lower performance with a higher MSE of 0.0158 and a reduced R2 of 0.9825. Nevertheless, the error remains below zero, demonstrating the effective performance of the DL. On the Bitcoin dataset, RF and GB record the best MSEs at 0.000084 and 0.000097, respectively, surpassing DL, which has an MSE of 0.0087. This signifies that RF and GB offer more accurate predictions than DL based on the MSE. In addition, RF and GB also reach an impressive near-perfect R² value of 0.9998, indicating that they closely align with the overall data trends. The DL’s R² value is 0.9879, slightly lower than those of RF and GB. The Random Forest model exhibits outstanding efficacy in predicting abnormal closing prices from normal closing prices over different rolling window periods (7, 15, and 30 days), attaining an accuracy of 100% across all four cryptocurrency test datasets, utilizing metrics such as precision, recall, F1-score, and overall accuracy [42]. This remarkable performance signifies that the model accurately classified all instances within the test dataset, where the total number of normal cases in the Binance test data was 126, whereas there were 167 abnormal cases. In the Litecoin dataset, 301 normal cases were recorded, while the abnormal cases amounted to 292. In the Ethereum dataset, there were 194 normal cases compared to 233 abnormal cases. Lastly, in the Bitcoin dataset, 296 abnormal cases were recorded, while the normal cases were counted to be 300. This research introduced a comprehensive framework for predicting cryptocurrency prices and detecting anomalies through the integration of advanced machine learning, deep learning, and cryptocurrencies. Utilizing Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, and feedforward neural network models, this study addressed the inherent complexities and non-linearities in cryptocurrency data. Evaluation metrics such as the MSE, RMSE, MAE, and R2 demonstrated that the Random Forest model consistently outperformed the other models in terms of precision and robustness for the Binance, Ethereum, and Litecoin datasets. Gradient Boosting performed closely to Random Forest, delivering strong pre- dictions with slightly higher error metrics. Notably, the deep learning model achieved the lowest MSE on the Bitcoin dataset, showcasing its potential to handle certain complex This research also made a significant contribution by developing a Z-Score-based anomaly detection framework for cryptocurrencies, effectively categorizing closing prices as normal or abnormal. This detection mechanism provides crucial insights into important market events, equipping traders and investors with an additional layer of decision-making support. This guarantees transparency, immutability, and real-time access for documenting Future research could further explore extending this framework to incorporate addi- tional data sources, such as sentiment analysis from social media or news platforms, to enhance the models’ predictive accuracy and reliability. Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https://www.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 1864 Author Contributions: H.A. and B.A.; methodology, H.A. and M.M.; validation, H.A., B.A., H.Z. and M.M.; formal analysis, H.A., M.M., B.A. and H.Z.; investigation, H.A. and M.M.; resources, H.A., M.M., B.A. and H.Z.; data Analysis, H.A. and M.M.; writing—original draft preparation, H.A.; writing—review and editing, H.A., M.M., B.A. and H.Z.; visualization, H.A.; supervision, H.A.; project administration, H.A.; and funding acquisition, H.A. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: The authors gratefully acknowledge the funding of the Deanship of Graduate Studies and Scientific Research, Jazan University, Saudi Arabia, through project number: (RG24-S0149). Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable. Data Availability Statement: The datasets used are cited, and the code is openly available, submitted Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. Chong, E.; Han, C.; Park, F.C. Deep learning networks for stock market analysis and prediction: Methodology, data representations, and case studies. Expert Syst. Appl. 2017, 83, 187–205. [CrossRef] Smutny, Z.; Sulc, Z.; Lansky, J. Motivations, barriers and risk-taking when investing in cryptocurrencies. Mathematics 2021, Sun, W.; Dedahanov, A.T.; Shin, H.Y.; Kim, K.S. Switching intention to crypto-currency market: Factors predisposing some individuals to risky investment. PLoS ONE 2020, 15, e0234155. [CrossRef] Wang, Y. Do cryptocurrency investors in the UK need more protection? J. Financ. Regul. Compliance 2024, 32, 230–249. [CrossRef] Vaddi, L.; Neelisetty, V.; Vallabhaneni, B.C.; Prakash, K.B. Predicting crypto currency prices using machine learning and deep learning techniques. Int. J. 2020, 9, 6603–6608. [CrossRef] Kim, H.M.; Bock, G.W.; Lee, G. Predicting Ethereum prices with machine learning based on Blockchain information. Expert Syst. Appl. 2021, 184, 115480. [CrossRef] Yuan, Z. Gold and Bitcoin Price Prediction based on KNN, XGBoost and LightGBM Model. Highlights Sci. Eng. Technol. 2023, Assiri, B.; Khan, W.Z. Fair and trustworthy: Lock-free enhanced tendermint blockchain algorithm. TELKOMNIKA (Telecommun. Comput. Electron. Control) 2020, 18, 2224–2234. [CrossRef] Assiri, B.; Khan, W.Z. Enhanced and lock-free tendermint blockchain protocol. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Smart Internet of Things (SmartIoT), Tianjin, China, 9–11 August 2019; pp. 220–226. Assiri, B. A modified and effective blockchain model for e-healthcare systems. Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 12630. [CrossRef] Assiri, B. Leader election and blockchain algorithm in cloud environment for e-health. In Proceedings of the 2019 2nd International Conference on New Trends in Computing Sciences (ICTCS), Amman, Jordan, 9–11 October 2019; pp. 1–6. Assiri, B.; Alnami, H. Smart Partitioned Blockchain. Sensors 2024, 24, 4033. [CrossRef] Poongodi, M.; Sharma, A.; Vijayakumar, V.; Bhardwaj, V.; Sharma, A.P.; Iqbal, R.; Kumar, R. Prediction of the price of Ethereum blockchain cryptocurrency in an industrial finance system. Comput. Electr. Eng. 2020, 81, 106527. Chen, Z.; Li, C.; Sun, W. Bitcoin price prediction using machine learning: An approach to sample dimension engineering. J. Comput. Appl. Math. 2020, 365, 112395. [CrossRef] Talaat, F.M. An Enhanced Deep Learning Technique to Measure the Impact of Cryptocurrency on the World Payment system using Random Forest. Am. J. Bus. Oper. Res. 2022, 8, 8–15. Jaquart, P.; Köpke, S.; Weinhardt, C. Machine learning for cryptocurrency market prediction and trading. J. Financ. Data Sci. 2022, Viéitez, A.; Santos, M.; Naranjo, R. Machine learning Ethereum cryptocurrency prediction and knowledge-based investment strategies. Knowl.-Based Syst. 2024, 299, 112088. [CrossRef] Rebane, J.; Karlsson, I.; Papapetrou, P.; Denic, S. Seq2Seq RNNs and ARIMA models for cryptocurrency prediction: A comparative study. In Proceedings of the SIGKDD Fintech’18, London, UK, 19–23 August 2018. Iqbal, M.; Iqbal, M.; Jaskani, F.; Iqbal, K.; Hassan, A. Time-series prediction of cryptocurrency market using machine learning techniques. EAI Endorsed Trans. Creat. Technol. 2021, 8, e4. [CrossRef] Bollerslev, T. Glossary to arch (garch). CREATES Res. Pap. 2008, 49, 1–46. [CrossRef] Horv, L.; Kokoszka, P. GARCH processes: Structure and estimation. Bernoulli 2003, 9, 201–227.

Appl. Sci. 2025, 15, 1864 Siami-Namini, S.; Tavakoli, N.; Namin, A.S. A comparison of ARIMA and LSTM in forecasting time series. In Proceedings of the 2018 17th IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), Orlando, FL, USA, 17–20 December Sung, S.H.; Kim, J.M.; Park, B.K.; Kim, S. A Study on Cryptocurrency Log-Return Price Prediction Using Multivariate Time-Series Model. Axioms 2022, 11, 448. [CrossRef] Sezer, O.B.; Gudelek, M.U.; Ozbayoglu, A.M. Financial time series forecasting with deep learning: A systematic literature review: 2005–2019. Appl. Soft Comput. 2020, 90, 106181. [CrossRef] Li, Y.; Liu, M.; Cao, J.; Wang, X.; Zhang, N. Multi-attribute group decision-making considering opinion dynamics. Expert Syst. Appl. 2021, 184, 115479. [CrossRef] Islam, M.Z.; Islam, M.S.; Al Montaser, M.A.; Rasel, M.A.B.; Bhowmik, P.K.; Dalim, H.M. Evaluating the effectiveness of machine learning algorithms in predicting cryptocurrency prices under market volatility: A study based on the usa financial market. Am. J. Manag. Econ. Innov. 2024, 6, 15–38. [CrossRef] Samson, T.K. Comparative analysis of machine learning algorithms for daily cryptocurrency price prediction. Inf. Dyn. Appl. 2024, 3, 64–76. [CrossRef] Derbentsev, V.; Datsenko, N.; Babenko, V.; Pushko, O.; Pursky, O. Forecasting cryptocurrency prices using ensembles-based machine learning approach. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Conference on Problems of Infocommunications. Science and Technology (PIC S&T), Kharkiv, Ukraine, 6–9 October 2020; pp. 707–712. Farouk, M.; Shaker, N.; AbdElminaam, D.S.; Elrashidy, O.; Mandour, L.; Mesbah, M.; Walid, J.; Ahmed, M.; Attia, R.; Ahmed, N.; et al. Bitcoin_ML: An Efficient Framework for Bitcoin Price Prediction Using Machine Learning. J. Comput. Commun. 2024, Pan, L. Cryptocurrency price prediction based on ARIMA, random forest and LSTM algorithm. BCP Bus. Manag. 2023, Sinha, H. Predicting Bitcoin prices using machine learning techniques with historical data. Int. J. Creat. Res. Thoughts 2024, Khedr, A.M.; Arif, I.; El-Bannany, M.; Alhashmi, S.M.; Sreedharan, M. Cryptocurrency price prediction using traditional statistical and machine-learning techniques: A survey. Intell. Syst. Account. Financ. Manag. 2021, 28, 3–34. [CrossRef] Chen, J. Analysis of bitcoin price prediction using machine learning. J. Risk Financ. Manag. 2023, 16, 51. [CrossRef] Alamery, F.M.S. Cryptocurrency analysis using machine learning and deep learning approaches. J. Comput. Electr. Electron. Eng. Sci. 2023, 1, 29–33. [CrossRef] Srivastava, V.; Dwivedi, V.K.; Singh, A.K. Cryptocurrency price prediction using enhanced PSO with extreme gradient boosting algorithm. Cybern. Inf. Technol. 2023, 23, 170–187. [CrossRef] Fang, F.; Chung, W.; Ventre, C.; Basios, M.; Kanthan, L.; Li, L.; Wu, F. Ascertaining price formation in cryptocurrency markets with machine learning. Eur. J. Financ. 2024, 30, 78–100. [CrossRef] Parmar, A.; Katariya, R.; Patel, V. A review on random forest: An ensemble classifier. In International Conference on Intelligent Data Communication Technologies and Internet of Things (ICICI) 2018; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2019; pp. 758–763. Bhosale, J.; Mavale, S. Volatility of select crypto-currencies: A comparison of Bitcoin, Ethereum and Litecoin. Annu. Res. J. SCMS Pune 2018, 6, 132–141. cryptocurrencypricehistory (accessed on 10 September 2024). Scikit-Learn Developers. sklearn.preprocessing.StandardScaler—Scikit-Learn 1.6.0 Documentation. 2025. Available online: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.preprocessing.StandardScaler.html(accessed on 15 January 2025). Tatachar, A.V. Comparative assessment of regression models based on model evaluation metrics. Int. J. Innov. Technol. Explor. Eng. 2021, 8, 853–860. Tharwat, A. Classification assessment methods. Appl. Comput. Informatics 2021, 17, 168–192. [CrossRef] Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

---NEW PAPER---

FinSurvival: A Suite of Large Scale Survival Modeling Tasks Department of Mathematical Sciences Troy, NY 12180-3950, USA Department of Mathematical Sciences Troy, NY 12180-3950, USA Department of Computer Science Troy, NY 12180-3950, USA Department of Computer Science Troy, NY 12180-3950, USA Departments of Mathematical Sciences and Computer Science Troy, NY 12180-3950, USA Survival modeling predicts the time until an event occurs and is widely used in risk analy- sis; for example, it’s used in medicine to predict the survival of a patient based on censored There is a need for large-scale, realistic, and freely available datasets for bench- marking artificial intelligence (AI) survival models. In this paper, we derive a suite of 16 survival modeling tasks from publicly available transaction data generated by lending of cryptocurrencies in Decentralized Finance (DeFi). Each task was constructed using an automated pipeline based on choices of index and outcome events. For example, the model predicts the time from when a user borrows cryptocurrency coins (index event) until their first repayment (outcome event). We formulate a survival benchmark consisting of a suite of 16 survival-time prediction tasks (FinSurvival). We also automatically create 16 corre- sponding classification problems for each task by thresholding the survival time using the restricted mean survival time. With over 7.5 million records, FinSurvival provides a suite of realistic financial modeling tasks that will spur future AI survival modeling research. Our evaluation indicated that these are challenging tasks that are not well addressed by existing methods. FinSurvival enables the evaluation of AI survival models applicable to traditional finance, industry, medicine, and commerce, which is currently hindered by the lack of large public datasets. Our benchmark demonstrates how AI models could assess opportunities and risks in DeFi. In the future, the FinSurvival benchmark pipeline can be used to create new benchmarks by incorporating more DeFi transactions and protocols as the use of cryptocurrency grows. ©2025 Aaron Green, Zihan Nie, Hanzhen Qin, Oshani Seneviratne, and Kristin P. Bennett. arXiv:2507.14160v1 [q-fin.ST] 7 Jul 2025

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett survival analysis, benchmark, big data, finance, decentralized finance, defi, fintech, lending, Aave, blockchain Survival data, also called time-to-event data, is used to create models for how long it takes for certain events to occur. This kind of data arises in a wide range of disciplines, most no- tably in finance, where events of interest could include loan defaults [DUFFIE et al. (2009); Lando (1998)], bankruptcy [Shumway (2001)], or customer churn, and in medicine, where events of interest could include the recovery or death of a patient. Given the nature of these disciplines, survival datasets about these events can be difficult to obtain. These datasets tend to be sensitive or private, with many deep-learning-based survival methods being based on economic data that requires expensive paid subscriptions or medical datasets that have restricted or no availability [Ranganath et al. (2016); Miscouridou et al. (2018); Jing et al. (2019); Lee et al. (2018)]. In addition, these datasets tend to be limited in size. Many pop- ular survival datasets such as METABRIC [Curtis et al. (2012)] or SUPPORT [Knaus et al. (1995)] have only between 1,500 and 10,000 records, and in SurvSet [Drysdale (2022)], which contains a repository of 76 survival datasets, the largest dataset has just 52,422 records, and most are much smaller. Not only do these datasets have relatively few records, but they also have very few features, most containing fewer than ten features. One prominent application of survival analysis is in the field of Omics. The data in this domain typically contains huge amounts of features (> 4000), but very few records (< 100). Paid economic survival data can contain large datasets such as Moody’s Default and Recovery Database 1, which has over 850,000 records, but the cost to access the data can be prohibitively high. Given the effectiveness of deep learning models in nearly every discipline, and given these models’ need for lots of training data, the existing survival datasets are too small to truly assess the capacities of state-of-the-art models. We address this gap by publishing a novel collection of survival datasets based on free, publicly accessible financial transaction data from the decentralized finance (DeFi) space that consists of 16 different time-to-event scenarios and combines for 7,698,497 records, averaging over 481,000 records per dataset. We show a comparison of our data size with various public survival datasets from other domains in table 1. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first large-scale, publicly avail- able financial survival dataset derived from DeFi transactions. Additionally, our datasets contain no personal identification information (PII) nor intellectual property (IP) and are freely available for research use. DeFi is an emerging area within the cryptocurrency world that aims to provide financial services without the need for traditional banks. It uses blockchain technology and smart contracts to offer services like lending, borrowing, trading, and earning interest on crypto One major type of DeFi application is the lending protocol. function similarly to banks in traditional finance, allowing users to deposit their monetary assets into a savings account and accrue some interest, as well as borrow funds from the protocol using their deposited assets as collateral. In this work, we use data from one of the

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance Table 1: Comparison of our dataset with other publicly available survival datasets. leading lending protocols, Aave [Boado, Ernesto (2020)], which has more than $27 billion locked across eight different networks and 15 markets as of April 4, 2025. In Aave, we study five key transaction types that facilitate lending and borrowing ac- tivities: deposits, borrows, repays, withdraws, and liquidations. The protocol users are actually cryptocurrency wallets with no identifying information. Deposit transactions in- volve users supplying a cryptocurrency to the protocol to earn interest over time while providing liquidity for borrowers. Deposits also serve as collateral for the users’ loans. Bor- row transactions allow users to take out loans against their deposited collateral, enabling them to access liquidity without selling their assets. Repay transactions refer to the act of paying back borrowed funds, reducing the borrower’s outstanding debt and interest obliga- tions. Withdraw transactions enable users to retrieve their deposited assets, provided they still meet the collateral requirements after the withdrawal. Lastly, liquidation transactions occur when a borrower’s collateral value falls below the required threshold, triggering the sale of collateral to repay the loan and protect the protocol’s solvency. The cryptocurrency used in a transaction is referred to as the reserve. These transactions collectively define the fundamental financial dynamics of lending in Aave. There are some natural questions one can ask about user behaviors based on these transaction types, such as “How long do users take to repay loans after borrowing?” or “How long do users leave deposited money in their account before withdrawing it?” We build distinct survival datasets to model these types In this paper, we collected raw Aave user transaction data from TheGraph2 and created a pipeline for transforming the transaction data into survival data. This process involves selecting one of the transaction types as an index event and another transaction type as an outcome event, collating transactions based on the user and coin (i.e., reserve) used in

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett the transaction, and computing the time elapsed between the index and outcome events. We use this process to create 16 distinct survival datasets, which we explain in detail in section 2. Each of these datasets corresponds to a different user behavior pattern in Aave and enables meaningful survival analyses. For each dataset, we used domain knowledge to derive 128 features describing the transaction and prior account history for the index event. To demonstrate the utility of our datasets, we define two benchmark tasks: (1) Time- to-Event Prediction, which involves estimating the expected time until an outcome event occurs, and (2) Event Occurrence Prediction, which involves predicting whether an outcome event will occur within a specified time frame. In addition to its scale and openness, our FinSurvival dataset fills a critical gap in the evaluation of survival models under real-world conditions of high-censoring and structured financial data. FinSurvival offers structured, high-dimensional data derived from real financial behavior with a mean censoring rate exceeding 80% across its 16 datasets. Thus, this dataset provides the machine learning community with a much-needed testbed for developing and evaluating models that must perform reliably when event signals are rare, covariates are rich, and data is complex– conditions that are increasingly relevant in financial domains. Contributions: Our paper makes the following contributions: • Release of novel, large survival datasets: We created and released a collection of 16 large-scale survival datasets derived from real financial transaction data. • Benchmarking results: We create two tasks for each of these survival datasets (time-to-event prediction and classification), then benchmark several models’ perfor- mance for these tasks. • Open-source code: All code written to reproduce the content of this paper is pub- lished in a Github repository 3. This includes code to transform raw transaction data (along with a sample of raw transaction data) into survival data, code to compute data statistics in this paper, and code to reproduce the experiments. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we describe our datasets in detail and explain how they were converted into train and test sets for experiments. In section 3 we explain how we set up the survival prediction task for each dataset and provide benchmark results for several survival methods on this task. Similarly, section 4 explains how we built a corresponding classification task using the Restricted Mean Survival Time (RMST) [Uno et al. (2014)] for each dataset, once again benchmarking several classification methods on this task. Finally, we conclude with a discussion of the overall results in section 5 and how this work can be extended in the future in section 6. 2.1 Overview of Survival Data Survival analysis data are typically collected by identifying a cohort of subjects and record- ing the time until an event of interest, known as the “outcome event,” occurs. The starting point for measuring time is often referred to as the “index event,” which can be an initial

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance Figure 1: The idea behind survival data. One or more subject types are selected and observed over a given observation period. Activity is monitored, waiting for an index event to trigger the start of a record. A chosen outcome event marks the end of the record, or the record is censored at the end of the observation period. diagnosis, treatment commencement, or any other significant starting point relevant to the study. Data collection involves tracking subjects over a specified period, noting whether and when the outcome event, such as death, relapse, or recovery, happens. Additionally, for those subjects who do not experience the outcome event within the observation period, their data are considered censored at the last point of follow-up, thereby accounting for incomplete observations. This method allows researchers to analyze the time-to-event data, accommodating both observed and censored cases, to derive meaningful insights into the factors influencing survival times. See section 2.1 for a visualization of this idea in the context of our data. Our suite of survival datasets is all created from raw transaction data from the DeFi lending protocol Aave, specifically the Aave V2 Ethereum protocol. This data was acquired from The Graph4. We built a pipeline to convert the raw transaction data into survival data, using this pipeline to create 16 survival datasets. These datasets were built by separately treating each transaction type (except for liquidations) as index events, and subsequently each of the other transaction types as a possible outcome event. Liquidations, which roughly correspond to partial defaults on a borrowing transaction, are quite rare. This produces four possible index events, each with four possible outcome events. One notable feature of our data is that, because we were able to collect every transaction since Aave launched, we have no left-censored records. Every record has an associated index event. For an example of what one of our survival datasets looks like, see table 2. For an overview of all 16 datasets, see table 4. We also show Kaplan–Meier survival curves for all 16 datasets in section 2.1 to show that these datasets represent different patterns of behavior. We also include 128 features for this survival data based on prior publications and domain knowledge [Green et al. (2022, 2023)]. The raw data for each transaction contains

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett Figure 2: Kaplan–Meier curves for all index event and outcome event combinations. Each plot contains four curves representing a single index event and the four outcome events possible for that index event. These curves show that there is a variety of behaviors across our different datasets.

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance Table 2: The structure of one of our survival datasets, Borrow-to-Repay, with some features excluded for brevity. “Time” represents the elapsed number of seconds between the index and outcome events. “Status” represents whether the observation was censored. “User” is a blockchain address of the user who performed the transac- tion. “Coin” is the cryptocurrency used in transactions. “Index” and “Outcome” are the index and outcome event types. 22 features, most of which can be kept as features for each record. These include features like which coin was used in a transaction (reserve), how much money was involved in a transaction, the lending pool involved, etc. Different transaction types have slightly different inherent features, and if a feature is irrelevant for a particular transaction type, we leave it as NA. The exact features are listed in table 11 in appendix B.4. On top of these features, we engineered larger sets of features following three major themes. We built 19 features to represent the temporal aspect of transactions in different ways, encoding the date and time of each transaction into cyclic representations based on the day of the month, day of the week, day of the quarter, etc. We built 45 user-history features that represent up to the time of a given transaction a summary of the user’s transaction history, such as how much money they have spent on each transaction type, how frequently they have made transactions, what coins they use most often, etc. Similarly, we built 40 features that represent a summarized history of the market as a whole up to the time of the transaction, such as how much of a specific coin in a transaction has been borrowed or deposited up to that point. A more detailed overview of these features can be found in We had to split the data temporally into a training and a testing set to run experiments on this data. To do this, we chose a cutoff date of July 1, 2022. The training set includes data before this cutoff date, and the testing set includes data afterwards. This date was chosen because approximately 60% of all transactions occur before this date and 40% occur after. In addition to the cutoff, we included a buffer window at the end of both the training and testing sets, during which time we ignored new index events. We did this to give each index event a fair amount of time to see an outcome event before the end of the observation period. The buffer length was selected in conjunction with the restricted mean survival times (RMSTs) for each task. The RMST calculates the mean survival time of a dataset up to a specific point in time after the index event. When creating the classification task (see section 4), the RMSTs were calculated for each task for increasing durations until the

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett Table 3: Overview of all the survival data in our suite of 16 datasets. November 30, 2020 - September 30, 2024 Borrow, Deposit, Repay, Withdraw Account Liquidated, Borrow, Deposit, Re- Table 4: Summary statistics of the different types of survival data in the dataset based on index and outcome events. RMSTs changed by less than five percent. We used the converged RMST values for the classification criteria. Since these values ended up being less than 30 days (see table 5), we chose a 30-day buffer for ignoring new index events in the train and test sets.

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance 3 FinSurvival Prediction Tasks and Results 3.1 Model Selection and Evaluation Metrics We implemented four traditional survival regression models: Cox Proportional Hazards [Cox (1972)], Accelerated Failure Time (AFT) [Crowther et al. (2022)], Gradient Boosting Ma- chine (GBM) [Friedman (2001)], and XGBoost [Chen and Guestrin (2016)]. The Cox model estimates hazard rates as a function of user and transaction features, while the AFT model predicts the log-transformed survival time under a Weibull distribution assumption. The GBM approach leverages boosting techniques to capture complex interactions. Finally, the XGBoost model applies an AFT objective to directly handle censored survival data. We also implemented two deep-learning survival models: DeepSurv [Katzman et al. (2018)] and DeepHit [Lee et al. (2018)]. Over the past decade, numerous deep survival models have been introduced, leveraging state-of-the-art deep learning architectures such as feed-forward neural networks and Transformer Models [Wiegrebe et al. (2024)]. Notably, there are Cox-based models like DeepSurv and discrete-time methods like DeepHit. Deep- Surv uses a feed-forward neural network to model the log-risk function within a traditional Cox regression framework. In contrast, DeepHit treats time as discrete and typically em- ploys classification techniques, with outcomes being binary event indicators for each discrete time point or interval. We implemented these two models using previously published code and compared their results with the traditional models on our data. Detailed descriptions of each model’s implementation, including data preparation, fea- ture selection, and hyperparameter settings, are provided in appendix A. The Concordance Index (C-index) evaluated the baseline survival prediction models. The C-index assesses the models’ abilities to discriminate between individuals with different survival times. C-index values are better the closer they are to 1, and the lowest possible To assess which models performed best overall, we computed the mean Borda rank for each model as described in Pav˜ao (2023). First, we ranked the models on each dataset using the Borda ranking system, which assigns each candidate model a rank from 1 to n, where n is the number of candidates, based on their score. For example, since we have n = 6 models, for any one dataset, the model with the highest c-index is given a rank of 1, the second highest gets rank 2, etc. With models being ranked for each dataset, we computed the mean Borda rank for each model to estimate which models were the best across the whole benchmark. We sort the columns according to this ranking. Lower Borda ranks mean We use the same method to rank the difficulty of the datasets. By ranking how well individual models performed across all datasets and subsequently averaging these rankings, we can compare the difficulty of each dataset for our models to learn. We sort the rows in order of increasing mean Borda rank to represent the increasing difficulty of the datasets. Since both the rows and columns are sorted by their mean Borda rank, which is dependent on the number of rows or columns, we divide the mean Borda ranks by the number of rows and columns, respectively, to have the same scale on each axis.

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett 3.2 FinSurvival Prediction Benchmark Results In fig. 3, we summarize the performance of the six survival models on our datasets (table 7 in appendix A.3 gives the exact values). The rows and columns of the heatmap are sorted based on their mean Borda ranks. The XGBoost model consistently achieved the highest C-index values and had the high- est average C-index overall. This was followed closely by AFT. While the Cox model ranked third overall, it really only performed well on two datasets (withdraw-borrow and withdraw-repay). The rest of the results for the Cox model amount to little more than ran- dom guessing. The GBM model performed extremely poorly, consistently attaining c-index values near or below 0.3. Since a c-index of 0.5 indicates random guessing, it would seem that GBM is consistently learning something about the data to predict survival times in a manner even worse than random guessing. The deep learning methods showed very poor performance. This highlights potential challenges in hyperparameter tuning and optimization and indicates the complexity inherent in applying deep learning to survival analysis tasks. The observed differences between linear and nonlinear models also emphasize the presence of complex nonlinear relationships within the data, underscoring the importance of careful feature selection, representation learning, Overall, these results emphasize the utility of traditional survival analysis methods such as XGBoost and AFT for predicting financial events in DeFi environments. variability in C-index values across different tasks shows this suite of datasets’ inherent difficulty and complexity. These results also indicate that, while existing methods can be effective, there remains significant room for improvement in survival modeling, especially With the rows and columns arranged by mean Borda rankings, the heatmap shows the best-performing models on the left and the easiest-to-learn datasets on top. The models perform worse, and the datasets get harder as we move towards the bottom right. There are some interesting things to learn from this ranking. First, all four of the datasets that have withdrawal as the index event are ranked among the easiest six datasets. This feels a little bit counterintuitive since withdrawals involve pulling money out of the lending pool, and it does not feel like they set up an obvious next action for a user. Two of the more obviously meaningful datasets, deposit-withdraw and borrow-repay, are among the most difficult datasets to predict. These events could be easily interpreted as representing the time until a customer churns and the time until a loan repayment, respectively. The fact that they remain difficult to predict shows that user behavior is varied and based on a complex set of factors. 4 FinSurvival-Classification Tasks and Results We converted the 16 survival tasks into a corresponding classification problem. Converting survival analysis into classification tasks has gained traction, particularly as deep learning models redefine survival modeling by enabling binary classification within fixed time in- tervals [Wiegrebe et al. (2024)]. This approach allows neural networks and similar models to address the challenges of censored and high-dimensional data, which traditional sur- vival methods, like the Cox Proportional Hazards model, often struggle with in complex

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance Survival Prediction Concordance Index Values Figure 3: Heatmap displaying prediction C-index values for survival outcomes across dif- ferent index-outcome event pairs. Each cell represents one model’s C-index score for an individual dataset. The rows and columns are each ordered in decreasing order based on the mean Borda rank among the rows and columns, respectively. Models on the left side performed better on average, and datasets towards the top of the heatmap were generally easier for models to learn.

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett datasets [Salerno and Li (2023)]. Classification-based survival modeling has been applied effectively in fields such as finance and healthcare, where timely and interpretable predic- tions are critical [Lee et al. (2018)]. We now describe our strategy for picking the fixed time interval for each task. 4.1 Classification data set creation To structure survival data into a classification format, we used a Restricted Mean Survival Time (RMST) to determine a classification cutoff. RMST, which calculates the area under the survival curve up to a specific truncation time τ, provides an interpretable measure of expected time-to-event within a fixed period. This method is particularly valuable for high-dimensional datasets, where traditional survival models, such as the Cox Proportional Hazards model, may struggle with censoring and dimensionality [Wiegrebe et al. (2024); Salerno and Li (2023)]. RMST was selected as it summarizes survival data without requiring the entire cohort to reach the event, offering a practical solution for heavily censored data. Unlike median survival, which depends on at least 50% of events occurring, RMST allows for summary statistics even with high censoring rates, making it a robust measure for our DeFi dataset. This approach aligns with the work of Uno et al [Uno et al. (2014)], who recommend RMST for survival analysis tasks involving varying levels of censoring and complex event distributions [Uno et al. (2014)]. RMST-based classification benchmark offers a standardized method for handling high-dimensional, censored survival data, crucial for evaluating model performance across complex financial datasets [Lee et al. (2018)]. Table 5 shows the RMST value and the number of days τ used for each task. The RMST over τ days is used to convert survival times for each time to classes: class 1 if the survival time is ≤RMST and class 0 if the time to event is > RMST. Points that are censored in fewer than RMST days are dropped. The RMST is calculated by measur- ing the area under the estimated Kaplan-Meier survival curve up to τ days, so RMST(τ) monotonically increases with τ. Thus, we want to pick a τ small enough to preserve data, but also large enough so that the Kaplan-Meier curve has flattened out. We calculated RMST(τ) for increasing values of τ in one-day increments and stopped when the change in RMST(τ) was less than 5%. Class 1 is then defined as events that see their outcome in less time than RMST(τ). The RMST was calculated using the monotonic spline method, particularly useful for high-dimensional financial datasets, where complex survival patterns require precise modeling [Biometrics (2021)]. Table 4 shows the number of records and percentage of class 1 data in each FinSurvival Classification task. We note that some tasks are extremely unbalanced, with class 1 rates as low as 0.2% 4.2 Model Selection and Evaluation Metrics We evaluated a diverse set of popular classification methods to get a baseline. The models used include Logistic Regression [Tibshirani (1996)], Decision Tree [Breiman et al. (1984)], XGBoost [Chen and Guestrin (2016)], and Elastic Net [Zou and Hastie (2005)]. In addition to the four traditional models, we used two deep-learning models for classification: Deep- Hit [Lee et al. (2018)] and a neural net model of our implementation. See the appendix for details of packages used and how models were tuned.

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance Table 5: RMST Values and corresponding Days used to create FinSurvival-Classification To evaluate the performance of our classification models, we use the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC), which is a robust metric for assessing the discriminative capability of binary classification models even when datasets are imbalanced [Bradley (1997)]. The AUC score quantifies a model’s ability to correctly rank examples by their predicted event occurrence probability, independent of classification thresholds. An AUC score closer to 1 indicates strong discriminative power, whereas an AUC closer to 0.5 suggests performance is no better than random guessing. As in the survival prediction task, we also aggregated the results from all 16 datasets to quantify which models were the best in each metric. We used the mean performance across all datasets for each model and the mean Borda rank for the models across each dataset. Due to some of the datasets being very imbalanced, we used the synthetic minority over-sampling technique (SMOTE [Chawla et al. (2002)]) on some of our datasets. For any dataset with 15% or less of the data in Class 1 (see Table 4), if appropriate for the model being trained, we train two versions of the model: one with SMOTE applied to the training set and one without. We evaluate these two models’ performance on a validation set taken from the training set and use the model with the better AUC for testing. 4.3 FinSurvival-Classification Benchmark Results Figure 4 presents a performance comparison of the six classification models across sixteen index-outcome event combinations (table 8 in appendix A.3 gives the exact values). Each cell reports the AUC, capturing how effectively each model handles class imbalance and Surprisingly, the linear methods of logistic regression and elastic net performed the best. They performed almost identically, with logistic regression just edging out elastic net

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett in mean AUC across all the tasks. The deep learning models of DeepHit and our custom neural net also performed strongly, achieving comparable results to the linear models. In contrast to the results on the prediction task, XGBoost performed very poorly compared to the other models. Overall, these classification results show that linear models perform well on this task for datasets and demonstrate the importance of model selection for different tasks. The deep- learning models show improved results compared to deep learning models on the prediction task, suggesting that deep learning models are easier to train for classification tasks versus survival prediction tasks. The collective results show that there are a variety of difficulties across these tasks as well. As with the prediction results, the rows and columns are arranged according to the mean Borda rank of each respective axis. Similar to the prediction results, the two easiest datasets are withdraw-borrow and withdraw-deposit (although in the opposite order). For this task, though, deposit-withdraw and borrow-repay are significantly easier than they were for the prediction task, ranking in the top half in terms of difficulty. This is a significant jump, and interesting in that it suggests that while it can be very difficult to predict how long it will take for users to churn or repay loans, it can be much more feasible to threshold the duration and predict whether the event will happen before the threshold. The FinSurvival benchmark underscores the challenges of modeling high-dimensional, heav- ily censored DeFi data. In survival prediction, traditional models such as XGBoost and AFT regression outperformed deep learning methods, with XGBoost delivering the high- est discriminative power. XGBoost and AFT actually performed fairly well, and the deep learning methods exhibited quite poor performance. This could be due to poor tuning, but we spent significant time tuning these methods, trying to achieve comparable results, and were not able to do so. These results suggest that conventional approaches remain solid in complex financial settings despite recent deep learning advances, and that there is still a lot of progress to be made in deep-learning models for survival analysis. For classification tasks using RMST-based thresholds, basic logistic regression and Elas- tic Net led in AUC score, and deep-learning methods demonstrated moderate performance. However, tree-based methods like XGBoost exhibited mixed or poor results. Although the deep learning models tested show promise, their performance may have been constrained by limited tuning. Further optimization could potentially improve their ability to capture the nuances of the dataset. Our results demonstrate that the FinSurvival dataset is demanding and complex, of- fering a rigorous benchmark for evaluating and advancing AI survival models. This work highlights opportunities for improved deep learning strategies and hybrid approaches to better capture the intricate patterns inherent in large-scale financial survival data.

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance Figure 4: Heatmap displaying classification AUC scores for survival outcomes across dif- ferent index-outcome event pairs. Each cell represents one model’s AUC score for an individual dataset. The rows and columns are each ordered in decreasing order based on the mean Borda rank among the rows and columns, respectively. Models on the left side performed better on average, and datasets towards the top of the heatmap were generally easier for models to learn.

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett Our FinSurvival benchmark and datasets fill a critical need for large-scale survival datasets in finance. Unlike traditional survival data limited to small samples or sensitive domains like medical records, our openly accessible DeFi-based transaction data offers millions of records covering loans, deposits, and liquidations. By capturing high censoring rates and complex user behaviors at scale, FinSurvival drives methodological innovation in deep learning for survival modeling. It can also be helpful for quantifying things like credit risks, repayment patterns, etc., in a transparent manner. The openness and scale of this benchmark fill in an important gap that should help improve the accuracy and modeling capabilities of AI methods for survival analysis and help extend survival research to new domains. While there are potential ethical, privacy, and fairness concerns associated with the release and use of traditional financial data, these are largely ameliorated in these DeFi sets. DeFi users inherently consent to make their account transactions public by engaging with a DeFi protocol on a public blockchain. There is no personal or private information associated with account IDs. Also, DeFi protocols such as Aave are inherently fair because every action of the protocol is encoded in published smart contracts that apply identically to all accounts as described by public data on the blockchain. This contrasts with the well-documented biases that have been found in traditional lending, e.g., red-lining in mortgage lending Yinger (2018). The possibility that the survival models produced could result in unethical and fraudulent behavior is very small. 6 Conclusion and Future Work This suite of survival datasets represents only a small fraction of the transaction data available through DeFi protocols. Not only are there numerous other deployments of the Aave protocol on other blockchains that have far more transaction data than the Ethereum chain used for these datasets, but there are other lending protocols, and other DeFi protocol types like Decentralized Exchanges (DEXs) that generate huge amounts of transaction data for unique problems. Our data creation pipeline can easily be used to convert transaction data from all of these protocols into new, massive survival data to create additional use cases and further challenges for survival modeling. One way these datasets could be expanded is by adding more features. An interesting avenue of expansion could be incorporating exogenous data such as stock prices and cryp- tocurrency prices over time, along with other data typically associated with price data, like trade volume, volatility, etc. These could be joined with our existing data based on the timestamp and may help models have more predictive power. The features created for this work were hand-crafted based on domain knowledge and in- tuition as to what features might be useful for prediction. This process takes a long time and extensive domain knowledge. One way this data could be used better is through an auto- matic feature-creation process that leverages AI techniques such as BERT-style transformer- based models to auto-generate more interesting features based on the raw transaction data. Such a model could create embeddings for each index event that encode a user’s entire transaction history and capture more mathematically complex relationships in the data. One limitation of this work, as it currently stands, is that it does not take into account Different outcome events can “compete” with one another as possible outcomes for the same index event. For instance, if a user’s borrowed funds are liquidated,

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance this competes with their ability to repay that loan, i.e., borrow. Our survival modeling pipeline can include competing events in creating datasets, but we have not included them in this analysis [Green et al. (2024)]. Incorporating competing events in these analyses would help the models more accurately reflect the dynamics of user behavior within the Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding We would like to thank students in the Data Analytics Research Course at Rensselaer who contributed to the creation of this project: Kaiyang Chang, Sean Fitch, Haolin Luo, Char- lotte Newman, Emmet Whitehead, Daniel Kirtman, Campbell Drahus, Alejandro Laphond, and David Quintero. The authors acknowledge the support from NSF IUCRC CRAFT cen- ter research grants (CRAFT Grant #22015) for this research. The opinions expressed in this publication and its accompanying code base do not necessarily represent the views of Biometrics. Empirical choice of time window for restricted mean survival: Statistical ap- proaches and applications. Biometrics, 76(4):1157–1167, 2021. doi: 10.1111/biom.13237. Boado, Ernesto. AAVE Protocol Whitepaper. Technical report, 01 2020. URL https: The use of the area under the roc curve in the evaluation of machine learning algorithms. Pattern Recognition, 30(7):1145–1159, 1997. ISSN 0031-3203. doi: L. Breiman, J. Friedman, R. A. Olshen, and C. J. Stone. Classification and Regression Trees. Chapman and Hall/CRC, New York, 1984. ISBN 9781315139470. doi: 10.1201/ N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer. Smote: synthetic minority over-sampling technique. Journal of artificial intelligence research, 16:321–357, 2002. T. Chen and C. Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’16, page 785–794. ACM, Aug. 2016. doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939785. URL T. Chen, T. He, M. Benesty, V. Khotilovich, Y. Tang, H. Cho, K. Chen, R. Mitchell, I. Cano, T. Zhou, M. Li, J. Xie, M. Lin, Y. Geng, Y. Li, and J. Yuan. xgboost: Extreme

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett D. R. Cox. Regression models and life-tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 34(2):187–220, 1972. ISSN 00359246. URL http://www.jstor.org/ M. J. Crowther, P. Royston, and M. Clements. A flexible parametric accelerated failure time model and the extension to time-dependent acceleration factors. Biostatistics, 24 (3):811–831, 05 2022. ISSN 1465-4644. doi: 10.1093/biostatistics/kxac009. URL https: C. Curtis, S. Shah, S.-F. Chin, G. Turashvili, O. Rueda, M. Dunning, D. Speed, A. Lynch, S. Samarajiwa, Y. Yuan, S. Gr¨af, G. Ha, G. Haffari, A. Bashashati, R. Russell, S. McK- inney, C. Caldas, S. Aparicio, J. Brenton, and A.-L. Børresen-Dale. The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumors reveals novel subgroups. Nature, 486: –, 04 2012. doi: 10.1038/nature10983,. Survset: An open-source time-to-event dataset repository. D. DUFFIE, A. ECKNER, G. HOREL, and L. SAITA. Frailty correlated default. The Jour- nal of Finance, 64(5):2089–2123, 2009. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2009. K. C. Floyd, J. Yarzebski, F. A. Spencer, D. Lessard, J. E. Dalen, J. S. Alpert, J. M. Gore, and R. J. Goldberg. A 30-year perspective (1975-2005) into the changing landscape of patients hospitalized with initial acute myocardial infarction: Worcester heart attack study. Circ. Cardiovasc. Qual. Outcomes, 2(2):88–95, Mar. 2009. J. A. Foekens, H. A. Peters, M. P. Look, H. Portengen, M. Schmitt, M. D. Kramer, N. Brun- ner, F. Janicke, M. E. M.-v. Gelder, S. C. Henzen-Logmans, W. L. J. van Putten, and J. G. M. Klijn. The Urokinase System of Plasminogen Activation and Prognosis in 2780 Breast Cancer Patients1. Cancer Research, 60(3):636–643, 02 2000. ISSN 0008-5472. J. Friedman, R. Tibshirani, and T. Hastie. Regularization paths for generalized linear models via coordinate descent. Journal of Statistical Software, 33(1):1–22, 2010. doi: J. H. Friedman. Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting machine. The Annals of Statistics, 29(5):1189 – 1232, 2001. doi: 10.1214/aos/1013203451. URL https://doi. B. F. Ganzfried, M. Riester, B. Haibe-Kains, T. Risch, S. Tyekucheva, I. Jazic, X. V. Wang, M. Ahmadifar, M. J. Birrer, G. Parmigiani, C. Huttenhower, and L. Waldron. curate- dOvarianData: clinically annotated data for the ovarian cancer transcriptome. Database (Oxford), 2013:bat013, Apr. 2013. A. Green, C. Cammilleri, J. S. Erickson, O. Seneviratne, and K. P. Bennett. Defi survival analysis: Insights into risks and user behaviors. In The International Conference on Mathematical Research for Blockchain Economy, pages 127–141. Springer, 2022.

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance A. Green, M. Giannattasio, K. Wang, J. S. Erickson, Oshani, Seneviratne, and K. P. Ben- nett. Characterizing common quarterly behaviors in defi lending protocols. 2023. URL A. M. Green, M. P. Giannattasio, J. S. Erickson, O. Seneviratne, and K. P. Bennett. Defi survival analysis: Insights into the emerging decentralized financial ecosystem. Distributed Ledger Technologies: Research and Practice, 3(1):1–23, 2024. B. Jing, T. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Jin, K. Liu, W. Qiu, L. Ke, Y. Sun, C. He, D. Hou, et al. A deep survival analysis method based on ranking. Artificial intelligence in medicine, 98: J. Kaplan. fastDummies: Fast Creation of Dummy (Binary) Columns and Rows from Cate- gorical Variables, 2025. URL https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=fastDummies. R J. L. Katzman, U. Shaham, A. Cloninger, J. Bates, T. Jiang, and Y. Kluger. Deepsurv: personalized treatment recommender system using a cox proportional hazards deep neural network. BMC medical research methodology, 18:1–12, 2018. W. A. Knaus, F. E. Harrell, J. Lynn, L. Goldman, R. S. Phillips, A. F. Connors, N. Dawson, W. J. Fulkerson, R. M. Califf, N. A. Desbiens, P. Layde, R. Oye, P. E. Bellamy, R. B. Hakim, and D. P. Wagner. The support prognostic model. objective estimates of survival for seriously ill hospitalized adults. study to understand prognoses and preferences for outcomes and risks of treatments. Annals of internal medicine, 122 3:191–203, 1995. D. Lando. On cox processes and credit risky securities. Review of Derivatives Research, 2: 99–120, 12 1998. doi: 10.1007/BF01531332. C. Lee, W. Zame, J. Yoon, and M. van der Schaar. Deephit: A deep learning approach to survival analysis with competing risks. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 32(1), 2018. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v32i1.11842. URL https://doi.org/10. X. Miscouridou, A. Perotte, N. Elhadad, and R. Ranganath. Deep survival analysis: Non- In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, pages J. V. Monaco, M. Gorfine, and L. Hsu. General semiparametric shared frailty model: Estimation and simulation with frailtySurv. Journal of Statistical Software, 86(4):1–42, A. Pav˜ao. Methodology for Design and Analysis of Machine Learning Competitions. Theses, Universit´e Paris-Saclay, Dec. 2023. URL https://inria.hal.science/tel-04401932. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2024. URL https://www.R-project.org/.

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett R. Ranganath, A. Perotte, N. Elhadad, and D. Blei. Deep survival analysis. In Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, pages 101–114. PMLR, 2016. S. Salerno and Y. Li. T. Shumway. Forecasting bankruptcy more accurately: A simple hazard model. The Journal of Business, 74(1):101–124, 2001. ISSN 00219398, 15375374. URL http://www.jstor. R. Sonabend. survivalmodels: Models for Survival Analysis, 2024. URL https://CRAN. R-project.org/package=survivalmodels. R package version 0.1.191. J. K. Tay, B. Narasimhan, and T. Hastie. Elastic net regularization paths for all generalized linear models. Journal of Statistical Software, 106(1):1–31, 2023. doi: 10.18637/jss.v106. T. Therneau and B. Atkinson. rpart: Recursive Partitioning and Regression Trees, 2023. URL https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=rpart. R package version 4.1.23. A Package for Survival Analysis in R, 2022. R-project.org/package=survival. R package version 3.4-0. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 58(1):267–288, 1996. H. Uno, B. Claggett, L. Tian, E. Inoue, W. T. Gallo, T. Miyata, D. Schrag, M. Takeuchi, Y. Uyama, L. T. Zhao, et al. Restricted mean survival time: an alternative to the hazard ratio for the design and analysis of randomized trials. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 32 (25):2389–2395, 2014. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2014.55.2208. URL https://ascopubs.org/ K. Ushey, J. Allaire, and Y. Tang. reticulate: Interface to ’Python’, 2024. URL https: //CRAN.R-project.org/package=reticulate. R package version 1.38.0. K. Y. Wang, G. M. Pupo, V. Tembe, E. Patrick, D. Strbenac, S.-J. Schramm, J. F. Thomp- son, R. A. Scolyer, S. Mueller, G. Tarr, G. J. Mann, and J. Y. Yang. Cross-platform omics prediction procedure: a game changer for implementing precision medicine in pa- tients with stage-iii melanoma. bioRxiv, 2020. doi: 10.1101/2020.12.09.415927. URL S. Wiegrebe, P. Kopper, R. Sonabend, B. Bischl, and A. Bender. Deep learning for survival analysis: a review. Artificial Intelligence Review, 57(3):65, 2024. J. Yinger. Discrimination in mortgage lending: A literature review. Mortgage lending, racial discrimination and federal policy, pages 29–73, 2018. H. Zou and T. Hastie. Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 67(2):301–320, 2005.

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance Appendix A. Model Implementation Details For both the survival prediction and classification tasks, our default data preprocessing involves three main steps: (1) scaling the data, (2) encoding categorical data, and (3) applying Principal Component Analysis (PCA). For scaling the data, we mean-center the training data using R’s built-in scale function. We use the training mean and standard deviation to scale the testing data as well. This scaling is only applied to numeric features. We do two things to handle categorical data. First, for any categorical feature with more than ten categories, we keep the ten most frequent categories from the training set and combine the remaining into another category called “Other”. We keep the same ten categories in the testing set and make “Other” for any remaining data as well. We do this so models have an easier time learning about less-common categories and to ensure the categories seen in the testing set are the same as in the training set. After this, we apply one-hot encoding to the categorical features using the fastDummies package in R [Kaplan Finally, we apply PCA to the resulting data to reduce collinearity among the features. We use the prcomp function from stats package [R Core Team (2024)]. We compute the principal components on the training set and keep the principal components that explain 90% of the variance in the data. We use the same set of principal components on the testing Unless otherwise noted, all the subsequent models for prediction and classification tasks follow the above steps in their data preprocessing. A.1 Survival Prediction Models Cox Proportional Hazards Model: The Cox Proportional Hazards regression model is used to relate various factors, considered simultaneously, to survival time or time-to-event. In this model, the measure of effect is the hazard rate, which is the probability that the event of interest occurs, given that the participant (data point) has survived up to a given time. Our Cox proportional hazards model implementation is trained using the coxph function from the survival package [Therneau (2022)]. We use the default parameters to train the Accelerated Failure Time Model: Accelerated Failure Time models [Crowther et al. (2022)] are an alternative to the commonly used proportional hazards model. In an AFT model, the effect of the covariates accelerates or decelerates the survival time by a specific This acceleration factor is assumed to be constant. Our implementation of the AFT model uses the survreg function from the survival package, and we use the Weibull distribution to fit the data. Any other parameters use the default values. XGBoost: Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost [Chen and Guestrin (2016)]) is a distributed gradient-boosting decision tree algorithm for regression and classification. Our implementation of XGBoost does not use PCA in its data preprocessing. We train the model using the xgb.train function from the xgboost package [Chen et al. (2024)]. We use negative log-likelihood as our loss function. We use a maximum of 1,000 boosting iterations and use a validation set to check the loss every 50 iterations, stopping early if the validation loss does not improve.

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett DeepSurv: The DeepSurv model was published by Katzman et al. (2018) and fits a neural network based on the partial likelihood from a Cox Proportional-Hazards model. Our implementation uses the deepsurv function from the survivalmodels package [Son- abend (2024)]. After experimenting with various hyperparameter configurations based on experiments from the original paper, we followed its configuration from the “simulated lin- ear experiment.” We had difficulties training this model on our full datasets, so we used uniform random sampling to sample 40,000 rows from each training set and 20,000 rows from each testing set to fit and evaluate the model. DeepHit: The DeepHit model was published by Lee et al. (2018) and fits a neural net based on the probability mass function of a discrete Cox model. Our implementation uses the deepHit function from the survivalmodels package [Sonabend (2024)]. To train DeepHit, we used the following hyperparameter configuration (any omitted parameters use Table 6: Hyperparameters used for training DeepHit. All the classification models follow the same default data preprocessing as the prediction models unless otherwise noted. After the data has been transformed into the binary clas- sification task, unless stated otherwise, the models use the following policy for applying Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE) [Chawla et al. (2002)]: If the train- ing data has less than 15% of its data in class 1 (see table 4 for class 1 %s), then a validation set is created from the training data and two models are fit to the training data without the validation set: one model on the raw training data and one model on the training data with SMOTE applied. These models are then tested on the validation set to see whether SMOTE helped. The better of the two models is used to predict on the testing set. All combinations of model type and dataset for which SMOTE was used are indicated in table 8 with an asterisk (*). Logistic Regression (LogReg): Logistic regression is a simple yet effective linear model that estimates the probability that a given input belongs to a particular class. It works by fitting a weighted sum of the input features to a sigmoid curve, which outputs values between 0 and 1 representing predicted probabilities. We use the glm function from the stats package [R Core Team (2024)] for logistic regression.

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance Decision Tree: A decision tree splits the data into smaller and smaller subsets based on simple feature-based rules, eventually making predictions at the leaves of the tree. It is easy to interpret and can capture non-linear relationships, but may overfit if not pruned or regularized. We used the rpart function from the rpart package [Therneau and Atkinson (2023)] for our decision tree implementation. We used a max depth of 30 and a minimum XGBoost: We used the same implementation of XGBoost as described above in the pre- diction models, but tuned it slightly differently. For the classification task, we use logloss as the evaluation metric. Our max depth is set to 6. We use eta=0.1, subsample=0.8, colsample bytree=0.8, and scale pos weight is based on the relative proportion of class 0 data to class 1 data in the training set. We train with 200 rounds and early stopping rounds Elastic Net: Elastic Net is a linear model that combines both Lasso (L1) and Ridge (L2) regularizations. It is useful when there are many correlated features, as it tends to select groups of them while also shrinking their magnitudes to avoid overfitting. We used the glmnet function from the glmnet package for our implementation [Friedman et al. (2010); Tay et al. (2023)]. DeepHit: Our implementation of DeepHit for the classification problem uses Python and the reticulate package in R [Ushey et al. (2024)]. This implementation is based on the code from the original paper, using the model for a binary classification task. We train on 10 epochs with a learning rate of 0.001. Neural Net: Neural networks consist of multiple layers of interconnected nodes, or neurons, that apply non-linear transformations to the input data. They are highly flexible and can capture complex patterns, but require careful tuning and lots of data to avoid overfitting. We built our own relatively simple neural net architecture for this classification task. The model uses a feed-forward architecture implemented with Keras’ Sequential API. It consists of an input layer accepting features of a specified dimension, two hidden layers, each with 64 units and ReLU activation, followed by batch normalization and a dropout layer with a 0.2 dropout rate. Then there’s a custom transformation layer that applies a log(1+x) operation to simulate a transformation relevant to risk modeling. Finally, there’s an output layer with two neurons and softmax activation for binary classification. The model is compiled with the Adam optimizer, categorical cross-entropy loss, and gradient clipping to mitigate exploding gradients. Table 7 and table 8 give the full numeric results for all models across all datasets. Appendix B. Survival Data Creation Pipeline B.1 Raw Transaction Data Collection The first phase for creating this dataset was collecting the raw market transaction data from the Aave platform. The underlying transaction data upon which this data is based comes from The Graph5, a decentralized protocol for indexing and querying data from blockchains

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett Table 7: Performance evaluation of survival regression models on various datasets using the Concordance Index. Best results per row are in bold. that primarily target the Ethereum network. Specifically, we collect transaction data from

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance Table 8: Performance evaluation of classification models on various datasets using AUC Scores. Best results per row are in bold. Entries with * used SMOTE. the Aave V2 subgraph6. This subgraph contains many tables necessary to query to get a comprehensive view of the transactions in Aave.

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett The data for each transaction type is in its table, so we queried each type to get data for all transactions from November 30, 2020, through September 30, 2024. The transaction types we use in our dataset are Deposits, Withdrawals, Loans, Repayments, and Liquida- To get all pertinent information for each transaction, we also collect data from the ReserveParamsHistoryItems from the same time span. It provides timestamped information about reserves whenever they are used in a transaction within Aave. This is how we can get information about how much a reserve was worth and what its interest rates were at the time of each transaction. Finally, we also collected data about the individual coins (the table is called Reserves) to get basic information about each reserve, such as its symbol, what functionality is available for it in Aave, and how many decimal places to adjust its numerical values by. the information from all of these tables, we were able to create one unified and human- readable view of the transaction data. We combined all of the transaction-type-specific tables, sorted them chronologically by their UNIX timestamp, and replaced IDs in many columns with more pertinent information so that each transaction could be comprehensible to a human. Information about the coins used in each transaction was added explicitly to each transaction record, so that at each transaction we can see the symbol of the coin(s) involved (e.g., BTC, ETH). The amounts of each currency being used in each transaction were adjusted by the currencies’ specific decimal exponent, as well as their conversion factors to USD at each transaction time. Other time-dependent, currency-specific data was added to each transaction to increase the amount of information contained within one record. The final structure of this transaction-level data is shown in table 9. This table does not include all the columns of the data, as there are too many features to include and many of them are transaction-type-specific. We also provide a table of metadata about these transactions in table 10. Table 9: Structure of raw transaction data showcasing the main features present for all

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance Table 10: Metadata about the transaction data that we collected, cleaned, and used to create the survival data being published with this paper. November 30, 2020 - September 30, 2024 B.2 Transformation to Survival Data Phase two of creating this data involved the creation of the pipeline to convert transaction data into survival data. Survival data, also known as time-to-event data, involves observa- tions where the outcome of interest is the time until a specific event occurs. This type of data is characterized by two main components: the observed time Ti, which is either the time until the event occurs or the time until the last follow-up (for censored data), and the event indicator δi, which denotes whether the event has occurred (δi = 1) or the observation is censored (δi = 0). Additionally, survival data often includes a set of covariates Xi that represent other variables which might influence the time-to-event. Mathematically, a sur- vival dataset for n subjects is represented as {(Ti, δi, Xi) : i = 1, 2, . . . , n}. This structure enables the analysis of both the timing of events and the factors that affect these timings. The motivating idea for how our DeFi transaction data can become survival data is that each transaction a user performs could be considered an “index event,” triggering the start of a record which lasts until a future transaction of interest, which could be considered the “outcome event.” For instance, if we want to track how long it takes for a user to pay off a loan of a certain currency, we could treat the transaction where a user borrows that currency as the index event and track that user until they make a repayment of that same currency. With this idea in mind, our pipeline for creating survival data needs the following • Event Data: A tabular dataset containing all recorded events that could be relevant to creating the survival dataset. • Subjects: A specified set of one or more columns of the event data that define who/what the subjects will be that we track when creating the survival data. For instance, most of the time we want to see both the “user” and the “coin” columns, because we are interested in how an individual user interacts with a specific coin over • Observation Period: A start and end date and time over which to compute the survival data. By default, this can be the entire duration of the events dataset, but could be set to a shorter time window for more targeted analysis.

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett • Index Event Set: One or more event types which will be treated as the index events to start the tracking of survival records. • Outcome Event Set: One or more event types that will trigger the end of a survival record if it occurs following an index event made by the same subject(s). With these parameters defined, we create the pipeline for survival data creation. Given all the parameters, we first filter out all events that do not occur within the specified observation period. Then we create a subset of the data that only includes the desired index events and another subset that only includes the desired outcome events. Grouping these subsets by the selected subjects, we then perform a rolling join on the index events with the outcome events, matching the subjects and using the first event after each index event. This creates a table where each row has information on an index event and the first outcome event performed by the same subject, if any, performed after the index event. With this, we can calculate the elapsed time between the two events, using the final time of the observation period as the outcome event time if no appropriate outcome event occurred. B.3 Curating Survival Datasets Considering each of the five transaction types as possibilities for index and outcome events was the obvious way to go about this, but liquidation events need to be handled more carefully than the others due to their involving multiple parties. So, first we considered the “basic” transactions of borrows, repays, deposits, and withdraws. If we choose one of these transaction types as an index event (e.g., borrows) and another type as outcome events (e.g., repays), we can create survival data that answers a question like “How long do users take to repay after borrowing?” It is important to note that the choice of subjects here is both the user and the currency involved in the transaction, because if an index event shows a user borrowing e.g. Wrapped Bitcoin, an appropriate outcome event should be that same user repaying Bitcoin, not a different currency for which they might also have a loan. Putting these ideas together, we created 12/16 datasets using the different combinations of basic transactions as the index and outcome events. We wanted to include survival datasets using liquidations. Liquidations can occur when a user’s overall account in Aave has an “unhealthy” balance of deposited assets compared These assets can include a variety of different currencies. user’s account is unhealthy, another user can perform a liquidation transaction, paying off a portion of the unhealthy user’s loans to claim an equivalent portion of the user’s deposited collateral assets and a small liquidation bonus from the protocol as an incentive. So, liquida- tion transactions include more than just one user. They include a “liquidator”, which is the user who performs the liquidation transaction, and a “liquidatee” whose account is being liquidated. Additionally, a liquidation transaction can involve any one of a user’s borrowed currencies as the “principal” currency, and any one of the user’s deposited currencies as the “collateral” currency. Given all of this, we handle liquidations differently than the other transaction types. In our suite of datasets, we only consider the case when a user’s account is liquidated. We use this event exclusively as an outcome event.

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance The feature engineering process produced a total of 128 features derived from raw trans- action data on AAVE Mainnet V2, of which 106 are constructed from the base features. These features fall into four primary categories: base features, user history features, market history features, and time features. The base features refer to the original fields extracted from the raw data, such as transaction amounts, timestamps, and coin types. From these base features, additional derived features were created to capture more complex relation- ships and non-linear patterns relevant to survival prediction up to and including the index event. The full list of base features can be found in table 11. Table 11: The 24 features from the raw transaction data and the transaction types for which each feature is relevant. Borrow, Deposit, Repay, Withdraw Borrow, Deposit, Repay, Withdraw Borrow, Deposit, Repay, Withdraw Borrow, Deposit, Repay, Withdraw Borrow, Deposit, Repay, Withdraw Borrow, Deposit, Repay, Withdraw The user history features are features created by user. For each user, cumulative cal- culations of the following quantities are created: seconds since first transaction, seconds since last transaction, the count of each transaction types a user has made, the sum and

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett average amount of each transaction type a user has made (in the native amount, Dollars, and Ethereum). The full list of these features can be found in table 12. Similarly to user history features, market history features compute metrics for the entire Aave V2 Mainnet market. This is a useful way of approximating a market’s relative supply and demand at a given point. For the entire blockchain, features track the number of each type of transaction, the average amount for each type of transaction, and the average and sum amounts of all currencies together in dollars and Ethereum. The full list of these features can be found in table 13. Time features were computed for every observation in the raw data. The ‘timestamp‘ variable represents the POSIX time (time since January 1, 1970, 00:00:00 UTC) in seconds. Circular representations of these time features were also created to capture the cyclical nature of time, such as the closeness of 11:59 PM and 12:00 AM. This resulted in three additional features per time interval: the value, sine, and cosine. The full list of time features can be found in table 14. The data set created contains 128 features in total, of which 106 are constructed from

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance Table 12: All user-level features engineered to represent a user’s transaction history prior to each transaction. Features with [TYPE] are created identically for each of the five main transaction types (borrow, deposit, liquidation, repay, and withdraw). The most common coin used by this user. The most common coin type (stable or non- stable) used by this user. Whether this is the user’s first transaction. How many seconds have passed since this How many seconds have passed since this How many collateral transactions this user has made in the past. How many Swap transactions this user has made in the past. How many [TYPE] transactions this user has made in the past. The total amount of the coin involved in this transaction that this user has used in their past [TYPE] transactions. The average amount of the coin involved in this transaction that this user has used per The total value, scaled to USD, of all [TYPE] transactions made by this user in The average value, scaled to USD, per [TYPE] made by this user in the past. The total value, scaled to Ethereum, of all [TYPE] transactions made by this user in The average value, scaled to Ethereum, per [TYPE] transaction made by this user in The number of days in the past seven days during which this user has made at least The number of days in the past 30 days during which this user has made at least The number of days in the past 365 days during which this user has made at least

Green, Nie, Qin, Seneviratne, Bennett Table 13: All market-level features engineered to represent an overall market’s transaction history before each transaction. Features with [TYPE] are created identically for each of the five main transaction types (borrow, deposit, liquidation, repay, and How many collateral transactions that have been made across the whole market in the How many Swap transactions that have been made across the whole market in the How many [TYPE] transactions have been made across the whole market in the past. The average amount of the coin involved in this transaction that users in this mar- ket have used in [TYPE] transactions in the The total amount of the coin involved in this transaction that this users in this mar- ket have used across all past [TYPE] trans- The average value, scaled to USD, per [TYPE] made by users in this market in The total value, scaled to USD, of all [TYPE] transactions made by users in this market in the past. The average value, scaled to ETH, per [TYPE] made by users in this market in The total value, scaled to ETH, of all [TYPE] transactions made by users in this market in the past.

FinSurvival: Survival Modeling for Finance Table 14: Time-based features created for each transaction in the dataset. Features prefixed with “sin[cos]” represent two separate features, one starting with “sin” and one A numeric value between 0 and 24 repre- senting the time of day at which the trans- The day of the week (1-7) during which the The day of the month (1-31) during which the transaction took place. The day of the year (1-365) during which the transaction took place. The quarter (1-4) during which the trans- The day of the quarter (1-95) during which the transaction took place. The time of day transformed by the sine The day of the week transformed by the The day of the month transformed by the The day of the quarter transformed by the The day of the year transformed by the sine The quarter transformed by the sine [co- whether this transaction occurred on a weekend (0 if no, 1 if yes).

---NEW PAPER---

Modeling cryptocurrency failure using deep learning approaches and a , Nan Li b , Hongwei Du a a College of Business and Economics, California State University, East Bay. 25800 Carlos Bee Blvd, Hayward, CA 94542, USA b School of Accounting, Shanghai University of International Business and Economics, 1900 Wenxiang Road, Songjiang District, Shanghai, 201620, China A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T The lack of enforced trading termination in the cryptocurrency market allows for an exploration of the “natural death” of tradable assets. We propose two deep learning survival models to study this phenomenon and a post- hoc interpretability algorithm to interpret the results and test the hypothesis. The proposed deep learning sur­ vival models outperform the time-dependent Cox regression in both prediction performance and interpretation flexibility. Our results indicate that lower trading volume, market capitalization, social media attention, and higher price volatility predict increased cryptocurrency “death” hazards. Cryptocurrency technology has achieved remarkable success and attracted substantial developer engagement and investments. Crypto­ currencies are traded on specialized financial exchanges, but one note­ worthy phenomenon in cryptocurrency exchanges, which is absent in the traditional stock exchanges, is the gradual cessation of trading (i.e., price and trading volume gradually fall to zero), signifying the "death" or failure of the cryptocurrencies.1 Such trading discontinuation may occur during market downturns or when the related smart contract applica­ The failure of a cryptocurrency may seem comparable to the delisting events in the stock markets. However, there are notable differences. First, in a traditional stock exchange, listed companies must adhere to the standards set by the SEC and the exchanges; their shares will be delisted if these standards are not met [1]. However, due to the decen­ tralized nature of cryptocurrency, regulatory authorities cannot effec­ tively mandate a complete trading termination, although government enforcement actions may limit or discourage it. Therefore, the discon­ tinuation of cryptocurrency trading is the result of a market equilibrium shaped by market dynamics and regulatory influences, rather than by direct regulatory orders. Second, in a traditional stock market, the de­ cision to delist is usually publicly announced [2], allowing investors to make necessary adjustments. Conversely, in the cryptocurrency market, there is no formal "death notice," and investors do not receive direct warnings before a cryptocurrency’s failure. Thus, they must make in­ vestment adjustments using their private information. Third, the price of failed cryptocurrencies will eventually fall to zero, but delisted stocks may still be traded at positive prices privately [3]. In the absence of direct trading termination orders, the crypto­ currency market presents a unique opportunity to examine the “natural death” of tradable assets resulting from market equilibrium. This paper investigates this phenomenon using various survival modeling ap­ proaches and compares their model interpretability and predictive performance. First, we estimate a Kaplan–Meier Survivor Function and a time-dependent Cox regression as the baseline. Second, we propose two deep learning survival models based on long short-term memory (LSTM) and transformer neural networks to address certain drawbacks of the Cox regression. Third, we propose a post-hoc interpretability algorithm to explore the lagged and nonlinear effects of the covariates using the trained deep learning survival models. The rationale of the interpret­ ability algorithm is to compute the expected impulse response function and use it to show how perturbations that occur to certain covariates influence the “death” hazard over time. Last, we interpret the non-linear effect of the covariates on the next-day hazard using partial dependency plots of the deep learning survival models. In conclusion, our proposed deep learning survival models offer superior performance in predicting cryptocurrency "death" while also providing more comprehensive and E-mail address: peng.xie@csueastbay.edu (P. Xie). 1 Please refer to the following examples of cryptocurrency failure: www.coingecko.com/research/publications/how-many-cryptocurrencies-failed. Accessed May Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Received 25 October 2023; Received in revised form 18 July 2025; Accepted 19 July 2025 Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215 Available online 21 July 2025 0378-7206/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

flexible model interpretations, especially regarding the lagged and non- linear effects of the covariates. This study makes several important contributions. First, in the traditional stock market, delisting decisions are typically governed by rigid and predefined regulations. Firms failing to meet certain financial and operational standards will be forced to delist from the exchange [4]. Therefore, examining the effect of the financial or operational perfor­ mance on delisting is pointless, as the delisting decision is deterministic due to regulations. Indeed, the literature mainly focuses on the effect of non-financial/non-operational factors on delisting, such as industry categories [5], firm longevity [6], and firm size [7]. Taking advantage of the unique and underregulated cryptocurrency market, this research examines the association between cryptocurrencies’ market dynamics and their failure, free from external regulatory enforcement to terminate the trading. As a result, our research manages to investigate the life cycle of a tradable asset only under market equilibrium, which is an unex­ plored research gap. We analyze the fundamental motivations behind trading behaviors through the lens of market microstructure theory and portfolio theory, and then apply their frameworks to develop hypotheses regarding effective predictors for the cryptocurrency death. Second, we propose a deep learning survival modeling framework to address two important drawbacks of the traditional time-dependent Cox regression: (1) lagged effects of covariates on the hazard rate are not captured (Bharath and Dittmar 2010) and (2) it makes strong assump­ tions about the underlying stochastic process (e.g., the log of the hazard is a linear function of covariates). These restrictions negatively impact the model’s performance and interpretation flexibility [8]. To address these issues, we developed two deep learning survival models based on the LSTM network and the transformer network and applied them to the survival data. These models are designed to predict the next-day death hazard using the complete historical time series of the predictors. Such models not only allow past observations to influence future hazard rate but also make no assumptions about the form of the underlying sto­ chastic process (i.e., both the form of the stochastic process and the parameters depend on the covariates). Last, this paper contributes to the interpretable deep learning liter­ ature by introducing an interpretability algorithm based on the impulse response technique to analyze the lagged effects of covariates in deep learning survival models. Although neural network models could approximate roughly any functions given sufficient complexity [9,10], interpreting the model and understanding its decision-making process is difficult for humans due to varying model structures and over-parameterization [11,12]. This study proposes an interpretability algorithm by emulating the neural network’s data processing to create connections between inputs and outputs. Briefly speaking, we first introduce a small fixed perturbation (10 % of the standard deviation) to each covariate, one at a time, and then calculate and summarize its ef­ fect on the death hazard rate in the following days to assess the influence of each covariate. Using this procedure, we managed to compute the expected impulse response function (hereinafter IRF) for the deep learning survival models to evaluate how cryptocurrency death hazard responds to market shocks over time. This is the first time the impulse response technique is applied to survival analysis to produce model in­ terpretations spanning a delayed period. In a related effort, we also created partial dependency plots for the deep learning survival models to examine the nonlinear effects of covariates. We introduce varying perturbations to each covariate and visualize their average impact on the next-day death hazard. Tradi­ tionally, a researcher may only assess the linear effects of the covariates using the Cox model. However, the actual effects could be non-linear (e. g., concave increasing, convex increasing, bell-shaped), and relying on a generalized linear model may oversimplify the relationships and over­ look important details. Our interpretability approach shows the poten­ tial of using deep learning models for hypothesis testing, an area typically dominated by interpretable linear models. The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature and develops hypotheses. Section 3 describes the data collection procedures. Section 4 discusses the traditional and proposed survival analysis modeling techniques. Section 5 presents the prediction performance comparisons. Section 6 illustrates the proposed IRF-based interpretability algorithm. Finally, the paper concludes in Section 7. 2. Literature review and hypothesis development 2.1. Survival analysis in business analytics and its integration with deep Cox regression is a statistical technique used to model the time until an event occurs [13]. It is mainly used in medical and epidemiology research to understand the relationship between a set of covariates and the time until a particular event happens, such as death and disease However, Cox regression has been increasingly used in social sci­ ences. For example, Borˇsiˇc and Kavkler use it to study the factors influencing the unemployment duration and find that higher education levels reduce the time to find jobs [15]. Agarwal explores the survival of new entrants into an industry and finds that entrants’ survival rate de­ clines with increased competitive intensity [16]. Sanizah et al. study the time to divorce decisions and find that the age at marriage, presence of children, couple’s educational level, employment status, and household income are significant predictors [17]. In a more relevant context, Cox regressions are also used in the finance literature to investigate the occurrence of significant financial events. For example, Eilnaz and Meziane study the decision of voluntary delisting and report that firms with high leverage, high insider owner­ ship, and low profitability/growth opportunity/trading volume are more likely to voluntarily delist from stock exchanges [18]. Shumway uses Cox regression to forecast bankruptcy and finds that variables such as firms’ market size, past stock returns, and idiosyncratic returns are important predictors. In contrast, many accounting-related variables are statistically unrelated to bankruptcy probability [19]. Maria and Lyn propose a Cox model-based credit scoring system that predicts early repayment and default for personal loans and demonstrates a competi­ tive performance when compared to the industry standard classification Although Cox models are widely used in survival analysis across various fields, there are several noted limitations. First, because the Cox model does not have an inherent mechanism to capture inter-period dependencies, investigating the lagged effects of the covariates is diffi­ cult unless certain lagged or cumulative covariates are included in the model estimation [21]. Second, even though the inclusion of the lagged or cumulative covariates into the models may address the first issue, these covariates must be custom-designed by researchers and can be rather subjective. For example, studies may use distinct time lags and methodologies to compute the cumulative covariates, and the appro­ priateness of these measurements relies significantly on the researchers’ domain knowledge [22]. Third, the model makes strong assumptions regarding the form of the underlying stochastic process (i.e., the loga­ rithm of hazard is a linear combination of covariates), and nonlinearity is generally not considered in the model [8]. The second and third issues have become more prominent with the advancement of deep learning technologies. In this research, we propose a deep learning survival modeling framework that potentially addresses all three issues. These models employ LSTM and transformer neural network structures to inherently capture the inter-period effects of covariates [23] while eliminating the need for manual feature engineering and assumptions for the underlying stochastic process [24]. Although there are several studies exploring deep learning-based survival analysis, each of them falls short in certain considerations [4–6], for example: (1) the hazard rate or the outcome variable at time t depends on the covariates observed during the same time t period, it is thus less practical to use the model in prediction; (2) the model is not a P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

time-dependent survival model; (3) there is no interpretability strategy proposed to obtain managerial insights; (4) there is no performance comparison between the deep learning survival model and the Cox regression; and (5) the loss function used in model training is not regularized to focus on “death” event prediction, limiting the model’s performance. Details will be presented in later sections. 2.2. Interpretability algorithms for deep learning model Deep learning algorithms started dominating prediction benchmarks around 2012 in many domains such as banking, retailing, healthcare, recommendation systems, and natural language processing [25]. In addition, deep learning allows machines to automatically discover relevant features and learn data representations that would otherwise be laborious and complex tasks for humans [11]. Such capability is ach­ parameterization. However, one major drawback is that such models’ rationale and decision-making process are usually unclear, reducing their capability to interpret and explain the underlying mechanisms The lack of interpretability hinders the adoption of deep learning models because they are difficult to trust, especially in high-stakes ap­ plications such as healthcare and financial services [27,28]. Research has found that deep learning models can be easily “fooled” to misclassify and generate unpredictable outputs in image processing [29] and nat­ ural language processing [30]. These undesirable behaviors sparked many recent studies to develop interpretability algorithms to gain users’ trust and produce insights about the model’s decision-making process The type of interpretability algorithm that is most relevant to this particular research is commonly known as the post-hoc interpretability algorithm, in which a separate explaining model is created to explain the main model [11]. There are many existing interpretability algorithms falling under this category. For example, Mukund et al. proposed the “Integrated Gradient” method, which attributes the contribution of each input feature to a neural network’s output by integrating gradients along a path from a baseline to the input [32]. Avanti et al. proposed the “DeepLIFT” method, which determines the contribution of each unit based on the difference between its activation value and the reference activation, whereas the reference activation is computed using all units during forward propagation [33]. Marco et al. proposed the “LIME” algorithm (local interpretable model-agnostic explanations). This methodology randomly samples data around inputs, computes their predictions using the black box model, and then trains a separate interpretable model on this perturbed dataset. The black box model is thus explained using the interpretable local model [34]. Scott and Su-in proposed the “SHAP” algorithm (Shapley Additive explanations), which assigns each feature an importance value for a model’s prediction by computing fair contribution scores based on cooperative game theory The proposed interpretability algorithm is created specifically to capture the lagged effect of covariates for longitudinal analysis. For survival analysis in particular, this method aims to estimate an IRF that depicts how perturbations to a covariate influence the hazard rate over time. The perturbations are introduced to each covariate separately, and their influence on the hazard rate is summarized to generate in­ 2.3. Delisting from exchange Delisting from the exchange primarily occurs in stock markets and refers to the removal of a company’s stock from an exchange [1]. There are two types of delisting: involuntary delisting and voluntary delisting [3]. Involuntary delisting occurs when a company is forced to delist from an exchange because of an SEC rule violation, failure to meet the ex­ change’s requirements, merger and acquisition, bankruptcy, or migration to another exchange [36]. Voluntary delisting occurs when a company withdraws its stock listings by repurchasing its shares or going Market [37]. For the two delisting types, research focuses are dras­ tically different. Since the reasons for involuntary delisting are usually deterministic (i.e., violations of government or exchange regulations), most studies investigate the consequences of involuntary delisting, which are mainly equity value decline, decreased liquidity, and lower trading volume [1,2,38,39]. In contrast, research on voluntary delisting primarily focuses on its reasons. According to the literature, companies voluntarily delist from stock exchanges mainly due to the inability to obtain enough funding to rebalance their leverage, limited growth op­ portunities, significant insider control, and high compliance costs (i.e., However, no matter how a stock is delisted, it is either due to reg­ ulatory requirements or a decision made by management. But what does the “natural lifecycle” of a tradable asset look like? How does a tradable asset reach its “natural death” without enforcement? To the best of our knowledge, there is currently no answer in the existing literature. The cryptocurrency market offers an ideal research setting to address these questions because enforced trading termination is practically impossible for cryptocurrencies due to their decentralized nature. This research aims to investigate the predictive factors for cryptocurrency’s “natural death” using survival analysis to shed light on this unexplored area of In this section, we draw insights from existing literature to identify four predictors for cryptocurrency failure. They include trading volume, market capitalization, social media attention, and price volatility. To study why trading stops, we must first understand the motivations behind stock trading. According to market microstructure theory, the most prominent reasons for trading are the heterogeneous expectations about asset values [40]. Private information and asymmetric informa­ tion lead to investors’ unique insights and market evaluations, contributing to price discovery. Even in an efficient market without private information (e.g., all information is freely available), differences in information interpretation also create heterogeneous beliefs that motivate trades [41]. While according to the portfolio theory, investors trade to rebalance and adjust their assets in response to changes in wealth, risk tolerance, consumption needs, liquidity needs, and invest­ ment opportunities [42], which lead to trading even in the absence of new market information. These theoretical frameworks provide a strong foundation for understanding trading halts in the cryptocurrency mar­ ket, and with which we will develop our hypotheses. The daily trading volume of a cryptocurrency refers to the amount of cryptocurrency exchanged during that day. A significant decrease in trading volume has several implications. First, it suggests that the in­ vestors barely have heterogeneous evaluations, indicating that the market may have already reached a consensus on the future of the cryptocurrency (i.e., death), which significantly reduces the number of interested buyers on the market. Second, a sharp decline in trading volume also suggests that the buying and selling of the cryptocurrency no longer address investors’ portfolio rebalancing needs. This implies that investors see limited investment opportunities and do not expect the trading of the cryptocurrency to meet their consumption needs, liquidity needs, and risk adjustment goals, indicating that its value has already fallen significantly. Therefore, we propose a negative relationship be­ tween trading volume and cryptocurrency death hazard. decreased trading volume predicts increased crypto­ The business failure literature has demonstrated that higher market capitalization correlates with a lower probability of failure [5,7,43]. Yet, it remains unknown whether this holds for tradable assets as well. As P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

discussed previously, investors have idiosyncratic investment needs and portfolio rebalancing needs [44]. A cryptocurrency market with a large market capitalization is expected to absorb these needs more effectively without affecting the stability and confidence in the market [45]. Conversely, in a low market capitalization market, large selling orders are more likely to create order imbalances, which are costly to absorb by the market makers. Such order imbalance may lead to large bid-ask spreads, significantly reduced prices, and even panic selling [46]. Therefore, we propose a negative relationship between market capital­ ization and cryptocurrency hazard. decreased market capitalization predicts increased cryp­ The emergence of social media renovated retail investors’ access to new information [47]. Previously, investors mainly relied on public disclosures such as quarterly earnings releases, analyst reports, and market news to aid their decision-making. As social media becomes prevalent, retail investors increasingly use social media messages to make trading decisions [47]. Social media users are motivated to share information with others due to many factors such as reputation, tenure in the field, and reciprocity [48]. Besides these non-economic motiva­ tions, economic motivations also exist, especially in investment com­ munities. For example, information shared by a message poster could influence the viewers’ trading decisions and expedite the convergence of market prices to the message poster’s expectation [47]. In light of these arguments, we expect social media attention to be an effective predictor for cryptocurrency failure. If a cryptocurrency re­ ceives minimal social media attention, it signifies a lack of investor in­ terest. Sharing information about a diminishing cryptocurrency fails to contribute to the goals of improving reputation, establishing tenure in the field, or impressing peers. Therefore, social media users will be reluctant to post messages about diminishing cryptocurrencies, and we thus propose the third hypothesis. decreased social media attention predicts an increased Most cryptocurrencies are peer-to-peer cash/currency systems. But unlike fiat currencies, cryptocurrencies are usually characterized by high volatility [49], indicating that speculation plays a major role in the cryptocurrency market rather than its application in trade settlement. For a currency to function effectively as a medium of exchange and a reliable store of value, it needs to be stable and non-volatile [50]. While some businesses, such as Apple and Best Buy, have started accepting cryptocurrency as payment for their products and services, the high volatility and the associated risks of cryptocurrencies significantly limit their adoption by small businesses [51]. Excessive volatility is also undesirable for an investment asset because investors are presumably risk-averse and dislike volatility [52]. Studies have indicated that the risk premium of volatility tends to be mostly negative across various contexts [52,53]. According to the portfolio theory, for a portfolio to remain on the “efficient frontier,” high volatility must be compensated with high returns [54]. If a highly vol­ atile cryptocurrency fails to outperform others in returns, investors will exchange it for other investment opportunities to optimize their port­ folio, negatively influencing the prospect of the cryptocurrency and In summary, we argue that high volatility negatively influences the potential of a cryptocurrency as a currency and as an investment asset and propose the next hypothesis. increased price volatility predicts increased cryptocurrency 3.1. Cryptocurrency trading data We downloaded the daily cryptocurrency trading data of 8194 cryptocurrencies, including prices, trading volumes, and market capi­ talization from July 13, 2010, to June 30, 2024, from CoinMarketCap. We set the beginning of the sample period to be July 13, 2010, because it is the first day that CoinMarketCap provides data about Bitcoin. Coin­ MarketCap is a website specializing in cryptocurrency trading data such as prices, trading volume, and market capitalization. According to SimilarWeb, a global website traffic analytics platform, coinmarketcap. com is ranked 865 globally in terms of website traffic (as of April 2025). CoinMarketCap is also the data source for many other cryptocurrency- According to the classic survival analysis framework, a crypto­ currency either survived beyond the data collection period (i.e., censored by the dataset) or “died” before it. Given the lack of a formal definition in the literature, we define cryptocurrency failure as trading discontinuation. Formally, we consider a cryptocurrency failed or “dead” on day t0 if the trading volume is zero across t0, t1, and t2. A failed cryptocurrency may resume trading in rare cases, but we consider only the first failure, to be consistent with the traditional survival analysis. Among all cryptocurrencies in the sample, some are barely traded and “die” too soon. We exclude these short-lived cryptocurrencies because cryptocurrency failure could be attributed to an unsuccessful Initial Coin Offering (i.e., unsuccessful project launching), but not to the factors of interest in this study. The influence of Initial Coin Offering is more likely to be factored into the price of those stable cryptocurrencies that have already been in existence for some time. After the screening, 2701 cryptocurrencies that survived >60 days remained in the sample. And their daily return, market capitalization, trading volume, and 3.2. Cryptocurrency social media data and search data To capture each cryptocurrency’s social media attention, we obtain social media data from Bitcointalk.org, one of the most popular online communities for cryptocurrency investors. Many cryptocurrency studies have used this online community as the primary data source [47,57,58]. This online community provides a message board dedicated to “altcoin” social media discussions (altcoin refers to cryptocurrencies other than Bitcoin), and we use this message board as the data source to obtain social media data. We matched each cryptocurrency with its social media messages using the appearance of its ticker symbol in the Besides social media, we use Google Trend data to control for popularity. Specifically, we use the cryptocurrency’s ticker symbol as the Google Trend search terms and obtain the monthly Google Trend score over each cryptocurrency’s life cycle to capture their popularity and attention over time. 4. Survival analysis modeling In this section, we first discuss conventional survival modeling ap­ proaches such as the Kaplan–Meier estimator and the Cox regression and then propose a deep learning survival modeling framework. 4.1. Survivor function estimation using Kaplan – Meier estimator Kaplan–Meier survivor function estimator (KM estimator) is a nonparametric statistical method to estimate the survivor function [21]. We observe each cryptocurrency i (i = 1…n) during each day t (t = 1,2, 3, …, T, where T is the last observation date). Following the standard survival analysis literature, if cryptocurrency i dies before T, we use tf to P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

denote its failure time. If cryptocurrency i’s failure does not occur before T (i.e., surviving beyond the last observation date), then it is censored [59]. Each cryptocurrency i is either dead or censored at the end of the data collection period (June 30, 2024). Consistent with the literature, we define the survivor function as S(t) = Pr the probability that a cryptocurrency survives beyond t. The KM esti­ mator is simply an estimator of the survivor function, expressed as: where t1 < t2 < … < t are unique days on which at least one death event occurred. During day tj when there is at least one death event, denote fj as the number of death events occurred and nj as the number of cryp­ tocurrencies at risk (i.e., the number of cryptocurrencies that neither died nor were censored). We estimate the KM survivor functions using different subsamples to provide preliminary support for our hypotheses. These subsamples include (1) cryptocurrencies with above/below the median of the average trading volume; (2) cryptocurrencies with above/below the median of the average market capitalization; (3) cryptocurrencies receiving above/below the median total number of social media men­ tions; and (4) cryptocurrencies with above/below the median of the price volatility. Fig. 1 illustrates these estimated KM survivor functions, and the results suggest that cryptocurrencies traded more actively, capturing a larger market capitalization, receiving more social media attention, and having a lower price volatility are associated with lower death hazards. These results support all four hypotheses. 4.2. Time-Dependent Cox survival regression The traditional Cox proportional hazard model assumes that the hazard at time t is an exponential function of a linear combination of the subjects’ time-invariant covariates, as shown: h(t) = h0(t) × exp (βX), where h(t) is the time t hazard rate, reflecting the instantaneous prob­ ability of death at time t conditional on surviving through time t − h0(t) is the baseline hazard at time t, and X are time-invariant covariates for the subjects. An important restriction of this model is that the re­ searchers do not observe the covariates X in continuous time, and they must carry the last observed values of the covariates into future hazard Relaxation of this restriction leads to the time-dependent Cox regression, where the hazard depends on longitudinal covariates. We follow the literature to analyze cryptocurrency death with the following time-dependent Cox regression [18,60,61]: h(t + 1 | X(t)) = h0(t + 1) × exp (βX(t)), where h(t +1 | X(t)) is the time t + 1 hazard rate for a cryptocurrency with time t covariates X(t), h0(t +1) is the baseline hazard at time t + 1, the term exp (βX(t)) is the hazard rate deviation from the baseline hazard due to X(t), and exp (β) is the hazard ratio indicating the changes in hazard given a unit change in the covariates. A hazard ratio greater than (less than) 1 indicates that a particular covariate is positively (negatively) related to the hazard rate. Note that we predict the death hazard of time t + 1 using time t covariates to ensure a properly designed predictive model, and this type of model configuration is in line with the Although time-dependent Cox regression allows for a longitudinal Fig. 1. Kaplan–Meier Survivor Function Estimation for Subsamples. P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

survival analysis, the covariates observed at time t only influence the time t + 1 hazard by its design. However, lagged effects are not directly modeled by time-dependent Cox regression because it does not offer any mechanisms to capture such inter-period dependencies. Therefore, we calculate a series of moving average measurements over a previous period to account for the trend and lagged effects. We compute two groups of variables. The first comprises the trading dynamics of cryp­ tocurrencies, including (1) Returnt, which is the cumulative returns over the past 30 days; (2) TradingVolumet and MarketCapt, which are the 30- day moving average trading volume and market capitalization, respec­ tively; (3) VolumeStdevt, which is the standard deviation of the trading volume over the past 30 days; (4) NumHighReturnt and NumLowReturnt, which are the number of days in the past 30 days that experience a re­ turn larger than 10 % or lower than −10 %, respectively; (5) Volatilityt, which is the sum of squared returns over the past 30 days; and (6) ReturnSlopet, CapSlopet, VolumeSlopet, and VolatilitySlopet, which are the slope obtained by regressing Returnt, MarketCapt, TradingVolumet, and Volatilityt on t using the past 30 days’ data, respectively, thereby capturing the general short-term trend of these variables. The second group of variables consists of social media attention received by the cryptocurrencies, including (1) AnyMentiont, which is a binary variable set to 1 if there is at least one social media mention during the past 30 days; (2) NumMentiont, which is the number of social media mentions during the past 30 days (set to 0 if AnyMentiont = 0); (3) NegSentimentt, which is the total number of bearish words divided by the total number of words in all messages mentioning a particular crypto­ currency during the past 30 days (set to 0 if AnyMentiont= 0) [63]; and (4) DaysSinceLastMentiont, which is the number of days since the cryp­ tocurrency was last mentioned in any social media messages. Apart from the 30-day moving average measurements, we also calculate another set of similar variables using cumulative aggregation (i.e., variables computed using a time window spanning from t = 1 to the current day) to explore the effect of the long-term trend. Under cumulative aggregation, NumHighReturnt and NumLowReturnt are replaced by PctHighReturnt and PctLowReturnt, which measure the per­ centage of trading days with a return greater (less) than 10 % (−10 %). Last is GoogleTrendt, which is the monthly observed Google Trend data for each cryptocurrency. Table 1 shows the summary statistics of these We present the model estimation results in Table 2, which shows the model estimated using 30-day moving average variables in columns (1) and (2) and the model estimated using cumulative variables in columns (3) and (4). The result shows that trading volume is strongly associated with the hazard rate. The coefficient estimates for TradingVolume are consistently negative and statistically significant for both models, indi­ cating that a 1 % increase in the 30-day moving average trading volume (cumulative average trading volume) is associated with a 0.87 % (0.46 Same as the values in the first column Same as the values in the first column Time-Dependent Cox Survival Regression Estimation. log (NumMention + 1) log (MarketCap + 1) log (VolumeStdev + 1) Likelihood ratio = 2401; df = 16; p = 0 Likelihood ratio = 1474; df = 16; p = 0 Note: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1. P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

%) decrease in the next-day hazard rate, supporting Hypothesis 1. However, high trading volume fluctuation tends to predict increased death hazards. Specifically, a 1 % increase in 30-day trading volume standard deviation (cumulative trading volume standard deviation) is associated with a 0.57 % (0.21 %) increase in the next-day death hazard. The coefficient estimate for market capitalization is statistically significant in the cumulative variable model, indicating that a 1 % in­ crease in the cumulative market capitalization is associated with a 0.06 % decrease in the next-day death hazard. These results are consistent with the KM estimator analysis and support Hypothesis 2. The coefficient estimates for DaysSinceLastMentiont in both models range from 0.0001 to 0.0002 and are statistically significant, meaning that on average, one more day without a social media mention is asso­ ciated with a 0.1 % to 0.2 % increase in the next-day death hazard. This evidence supports Hypothesis 3. However, the coefficients for volatility are not statistically significant in both models and thus Hypothesis 4 is not supported by the Cox regression. 4.3. Deep learning survival models Section 2.1 describes several drawbacks of the conventional Cox survival models. In this section, we propose a deep learning survival modeling framework to address these issues. The dataset used in this study contains daily observations of the covariates and the status variable (i.e., “alive” or “dead”) over the entire lifecycle of each cryptocurrency, which resembles a time series dataset and can be modeled using certain types of neural networks, such as LSTM and transformer, because they are capable of capturing inter- period dependencies, and thus the lagged effects of the covariates [64]. The LSTM network achieves this purpose by forwarding memory vectors from the past to the future [65]; the transformer network does this using a matrix reflecting the dependency among different days [66]. Furthermore, deep learning approaches eliminate assumptions about the underlying stochastic process and the need for subjective feature engineering. According to the universal approximation theorem, deep learning models could approximate any function given enough struc­ tural complexity and proper non-linear transformations [67]. They are also recognized for their capability to automatically identify relevant feature representations for accurate predictions [24]. Several considerations must be taken when using LSTM/transformer networks for the purpose of survival modeling. First, after the death of a cryptocurrency, all covariates are no longer observable. To enable batch training, padding the sequence of the dead cryptocurrencies is necessary to match the length of the surviving ones, both for the predictors and for the status variable. Therefore, in addition to the “alive” status and the “death” status, we introduce a filler status “post-death.” When training the transformer survival model, we apply a mask to block out the post- death dates so that the network will not learn dependencies for these post-death dates [66]. Also important is that the loss associated with the filler status “post-death” must not affect the cross-entropy loss function during training, so the model is forced to only improve the “alive” and Second, in our cryptocurrency survival analysis, there is only one “death” event at most (although in rare cases, a cryptocurrency may be “resurrected” after its “death,” we only model the first “death”), but many “alive” days before it. Therefore, equally weighting different days in the total loss calculation will result in underperformance in death prediction because the loss contributed from the single death event among all days is negligible. To regularize the network to put more emphasis on “death” prediction instead of “alive” prediction, we intro­ duce a hyperparameter λ to amplify the loss from the death event Last, the effect of the technology lifecycle of each cryptocurrency should be considered [68]. The death hazard in different lifecycle stages is likely to differ. We use positional embedding for this purpose. We give each day a fixed vector to control for the time effect. Consistent with the literature, we compute the positional embeddings using the following p(t, 2i) = sin ; p(t, 2i + 1) = cos In these equations, t indexes the days; 2i and 2i + 1 index the even and odd positions along the embedding vectors, respectively; d is the length of the embedding vector with 0 ≤i < d/2; and n is a user-defined scalar, which we set to 10,000. After incorporating these considerations, the modified cross-entropy loss function is as follows: i is the predicted day t + 1 death hazard of cryptocurrency i using day t covariates, qt i is the predicted day t + 1 probability that cryptocurrency i survived, St i is the true state of cryptocurrency i during day t + 1 (i.e., “alive,” “death,” or “post-death”), and m is the sample size. Grid search is employed to identify the optimal hyperparameters for the model and the training process. These include λ (ranging from 500 to 1500, in steps of 100), and the number of LSTM/transformer layers in the model (from 1 to 3). All models are trained for a maximum of 200 epochs, and early stopping is implemented to prevent overfitting. Training stops if the test set loss does not improve for 20 consecutive training epochs. In addition, the learning rate is scheduled to be halved if there is no loss improvement in 10 consecutive training epochs. Because the scale of the variables used in prediction varies dramatically, we also normalized each feature using all pre-censored/pre-death data to ensure consistent variable scales and improved numerical stability. Both the training and testing datasets are normalized against the training dataset to ensure that the testing dataset is completely unseen Fig. 2 depicts the neural network. First, we concatenate the input vector each day with the positional embedding; second, we forward the concatenated input into one or more LSTM layers or transformer self- attention layers; third, we further process the outputs using fully con­ nected feed forward networks; and fourth, we apply Softmax trans­ formation to generate the predicted next-day death hazard. To be consistent with the Cox regression estimation, we use day t covariates to predict the day t + 1 hazard rate. Unlike the Cox survival regression, LSTM/transformer networks can autonomously extract valuable features and grasp dependencies be­ tween different days [24]. Therefore, there is no need to design lagged variables or cumulative variables manually, the model directly takes the normalized daily observed covariates as inputs. However, variables such as DaysSinceLastMentiont, AnyMentiont, and GoogleTrendt are included directly as inputs because they cannot be disaggregated into daily observed data. The interpretation of these models is presented in Section 6 after we propose the interpretability algorithm. 5. Cryptocurrency failure prediction performance evaluation To gauge the out-of-sample hazard rate prediction performance, we use cryptocurrencies listed before September 15, 2020, on Coin­ MarketCap as the training set to train the models (both the Cox survival regression and deep-learning survival models) and use all crypto­ currencies listed after September 15, 2020, as the testing set to evaluate the prediction performance. In this way, we adhere to the existing literature to train the models with historical data and use them to forecast future outcomes. This allows us to reliably assess their predic­ tion performance and generalizability in future applications [5]. We use September 15, 2020, to split the sample into the training set and the testing set because approximately 20 % of the death events (186 death events) occurred after September 15, 2020, and about 80 % (740) occurred before it. This results in an approximate 80 %/20 % train-test P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

After training the model, we apply it to the test set to predict the time t + 1 hazard rate using time t covariates. The first survival analysis evaluation method we adopt is the one commonly used in the bank­ ruptcy prediction literature [5,19]. Specifically, during each day with at least one death event, we arrange the cryptocurrencies at risk (i.e., those cryptocurrencies that “die” during this day and those that survive through it) into 10 deciles based on their predicted hazard. We then place cryptocurrencies with high predicted death hazards into the first few deciles and cryptocurrencies with low predicted death hazards into the last few deciles. We then count and aggregate the cryptocurrencies in each decile that actually experience a death event during t + 1 through all days in the test set. If the model predicts well, this count should be very high in the top few deciles and very low in the bottom few deciles. Table 3 presents the prediction evaluation results for both the Cox model and the deep learning survival models. Column (1) shows that 65.4 % of cryptocurrencies that experienced a death event the next day are placed in the top deciles by the Cox model because of their high predicted death hazard, indicating the general effectiveness in death hazard prediction. Column (2) shows that the LSTM survival model slightly outperforms the Cox model in prediction performance by placing 69.6 % dying cryptocurrencies in the top decile. Column (3) shows that the transformer survival model significantly outperformed both by ranking 97.8 % of dying cryptocurrencies in the top decile. We also use the AUROC (area under the receiver operating charac­ teristic curve) to evaluate the models’ predictive performance. Specif­ ically, we compute the AUROC values for each day with at least one “death” event and present the summary statistics across all event days in Table 4. The result shows that the Cox model and the LSTM survival model attain comparable AUROC around 0.9, while the transformer survival model significantly outperforms both by achieving a much higher AUROC of 0.987. Both evaluation method confirms that the transformer survival model is superior in death prediction. The high predictive performance of these models is rooted in the drastically abnormal cryptocurrency trading patterns before its “death,” which can be easily picked up by the model. Fig. 3 compares the average trends of key covariates for surviving and dying cryptocurrencies over the 180 days prior to their censoring or death event. It shows that trading volume and market capitalization of dead cryptocurrencies drop sharply just before death, while those of the surviving cryptocurrencies remain largely stable. Also, for dying cryptocurrencies, the number of days since the last social media message and the price volatility also rise more than the surviving ones before their death. 6. Interpreting the deep learning survival models In Section 4.2, we conducted a Cox regression analysis and inter­ preted the estimated model to derive managerial insights. However, because Cox regression relies on an assumed stochastic process where Fig. 2. LSTM/Transformer Survival Model Illustration. Cryptocurrency Death Prediction Evaluation Using 10-Decile Method. Cox Model Trained With Both 30-day Moving Avg. and Cumulative Variables Percentage of the 186 death events in the test set in each decile P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

the time t + 1 hazard is the logarithm of a linear combination of time t covariates, its interpretability is not flexible, leading to limitations in the types of queries it can address. For instance, how does a shock to one of the covariates predict the hazard rate change over time? Does this in­ fluence diminish or intensify? Moreover, what are the more subtle non- linear effects of the covariates? In this section, we examine two ways to extend the interpretability of survival analysis: the lagged effect of the covariates and the non-linear effect of the covariates. Inspired by the impulse response techniques in time series analysis, we propose a post-hoc interpretability algorithm to understand the decision-making process of the deep learning survival models and to facilitate more flexible model interpretations. The impulse response technique is often used in vector autore­ gressive (VAR) systems to interpret the time series models. We will first illustrate the fundamental reasons why a VAR system is interpretable via IRF. Suppose a VAR system has p endogenous variables denoted as yt. Further assume a lag order of 1. Then the VAR system can be written as: yt = Πyt−1 + εt, where both yt and εt are p × 1 vectors, and Π is a p × p coefficient vector. Suppose a shock to the j-th endogenous variable occurs at time t (i.e., there is a small change to εj,t); then, the impact of this shock on all endogenous variables at a future point t + h is simply the derivative of yt+h with respect to εj,t, as Eq. (7) shows: Cryptocurrency Death Prediction Evaluation Using AUROC. Cox Model Trained With Both 30-Day Moving Avg. and Cumulative Variables Fig. 3. Trend Near Death/Censor. P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

(Πyt+h−1 + εt+h−1) = ∂ where the second equality follows from iterative substitutions using Eq. (6) and the third equality follows from the elimination of all y terms and ε terms not observed at t during the differentiation. The IRF is simply the j-th column in the Πh−1 matrix. Thus, the IRF derived for the VAR system only depends on the coefficient estimates Π and is independent of any intermediate y quantities from t to t + h. This is a desirable property because the interpretation of the model does not depend on the reali­ zation of the intermediate variables and thus is easily generalizable. For example, when assessing the impact of a shock to a variable on another variable h days later, the only information needed is the estimated co­ efficients while the realization of all intermediate variables or input variables from t to t + h do not matter. Such interpretation may be an oversimplification, but it is easy to implement and understand. However, when modeling a time series using deep learning models, the same IRF will depend not only on the coefficient estimates but also on all the inputs over time, as the functions involved in the computation are typically complex and non-linear, and differentiation will not entirely eliminate the intermediate inputs. First, take the LSTM survival model as an example. Suppose yt+1 is the predicted hazard rate during day t + 1, xt is the day t covariates, and mt−1 is the memory state of day t 1. Then yt+1 = LSTMOutput(xt, mt−1), and mt−1 = LSTMMemory(xt−1, mt−2)2. If a shock occurs to xt, the IRF h days later can be written as: LSTMMemory(xt+h−2, mt+h−3), and mt+h−3 in the expression can be substituted further by LSTMMemory(xt+h−3, mt+h−4). This substitution pro­ cess continues until the initial memory state minit is reached in the first period. As Eq. (8) suggests, the IRF is determined by a series of nested LSTMMemory computations. Due to the non-linear nature of LSTM com­ putations, taking derivatives with respect to xt do not eliminate any intermediate inputs from xt+1 to xt+h−13. Eventually, we must use the chain rule to back-propagate to the gradient at xt, which will be a function of the entire sequence xt to xt+h−1. Thus, the IRF can be expressed in the following form: g(xt, …, xt+h−1| β), where g(⋅) represents the nested LSTM functions in Eq. (8) and β rep­ resents the estimated parameters in the neural network. Because the IRF depends not only on the coefficient estimates but also on the entire input sequence xt,…, xt+h−1, making traditional interpretations such as “if xt increases by ε, the hazard will increase by a certain amount” is not possible. However, if we know the joint probability distribution of xt,…, xt+h−1, such as f(xt,…, xt+h−1), we can compute the expectation of the To calculate the expectation, we use the observed time series of covariates for all cryptocurrencies to discretely approximate the joint distribution f(xt, …, xt+h−1) and then to empirically compute the value of Eq. (10). The time series of the covariates for a single cryptocurrency represents a single random draw from the joint distribution f(xt, …, xt+h−1). We then compute the expected IRF by averaging the effect of the shock on the hazard across multiple draws (i.e., the full sample). The transformer network is in a similar situation. Suppose there is a series of covariates observed from time t to t + h, denoted as xt, …, xt+h−1, and a simple self-attention layer is applied to compute the hazard over time, denoted as yt+1,…yt+h. Let X = [xt,…xt+h−1], Y = . Also, the key, query, and value vectors in the self-attention layer are represented by XK, XQ, and XV, where K, Q, and V are the trainable parameters. Then, according to the classic self-attention procedure, Y = XV, and the IRFs are the upper portion of this func­ tion’s Jacobian matrix. Only the upper portion is needed because a hazard rate can only be influenced by the covariates observed in the past. Specifically, the IRFs can be written as: In particular, the IRF h days later after day t is: where the notation rowh refers to the h-th row of a matrix. Because the softmax transformation involves taking the natural exponential opera­ tions for each value in the vector rowh with respect to xt does not remove intermediate observations such as xt+1,…,xt+h−1, again making traditional interpretations challenging. But similarly, the expression softmax XV is just a function of xt,…xt+h−1. If we denote softmax …, xt+h−1 | β), where β represents the trainable parameters Q, K, and V, we can also compute the expectation of the IRF using Eq. (10) once we know the joint probability distribution f(xt,…, xt+h−1). Table 5 illustrates the procedure to compute the expected IRF of lag l given a perturbation to covariate x. Specifically, if a perturbation εs occurs during day s, for each cryptocurrency i in the sample, we replace xi,s with xi,s + εs. Then, we pass xi,s and xi,s + εs to the trained survival model separately to obtain two hazard rates during day s + l; one is the baseline death hazard without the perturbation and the other is the counterfactual death hazard after the introduced perturbation. For each lag l, we calculate the average percentage change from the baseline [g(xt + ε, …, xt+h−1 | β) −g(xt, …, xt+h−1| β)] × f(xt, …, xt+h−1)dxt…dxt+h−1 2 Assume LSTMOutput(⋅) and LSTMMemory(⋅) are the nonlinear computations in an LSTM block calculating the output and the memory state, respectively. 3 The nonlinear computations in a typical LSTM block consist of tanh and sigmoid functions, which involve natural exponential functions ex. Taking de­ rivatives with respective to ex preserves all its input terms. P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

hazard for each covariate due to the perturbation and then infer the IRF. To test the four hypotheses using the interpretability algorithm, we compute the expected IRF for the following covariate: log(TradingVo­ lume + 1), log(MarketCap + 1), NumDaysSinceLastMention, and Vola­ tility. The introduced perturbation εs to these variables is 0.1σ, where σ is the standard deviation of the normalized covariate during day s. We observe the IRF for a maximum lag of 10 days. Fig. 4 shows the expected IRF computed for the LSTM survival model. The expected IRF provides consistent insights with Cox regression models. First, a 10 % standard deviation increase in log (TradingVolume + 1) predicts a 1.46 % decrease in the next day’s death hazard, supporting Hypothesis 1. This effect quickly decays to zero within 6 days. Second, a 10 % standard deviation increase in log(Mar­ ketCap + 1) predicts a 0.34 % decrease in the next day’s death hazard, and the influence diminishes to zero quickly after a slight reversal, supporting Hypothesis 2. Third, a 10 % standard deviation increase in NumDaysSinceLastMention predicts increased death hazards during the next few days, but also with a reversal. In particular, the next day’s death hazard increase due to this perturbation is 4.03 %, supporting Hypothesis 3. Market reversals are common situations when overactions to new information (e.g., the introduced perturbation) are subsequently corrected toward the fundamentals [69]. Overreactions and reversals exists in various types of markets such as the stock market [70], the foreign exchange market [71], and the bond market [72]. Last, a 10 % standard deviation increase in volatility predicts a 0.01 % increase in the next day death hazards and this effect decays to zero within about 8 days, supporting Hypothesis 4. However, this effect is comparatively less Fig. 5 shows the expected IRF computed for the transformer survival model, which provides similar insights that higher trading volume, market capitalization, and social media attention are associated with lower death hazard, while increased price volatility corresponds to a higher death hazard. However, one notable difference is that the magnitude of the lagged effects and the reversal effect identified by the transformer survival model is much smaller than that of the LSTM Expected IRF Computation Procedure. The max lag of the IRF L, The date of the introduced perturbation s, The estimated LSTM or Transformer survival model f(⋅). The sample xi,t, i indexes the cryptocurrencies and t indexes the day. Initialize I ←∅, used to collect the empirical responses due to the perturbation Loop each sample i: I ←I ∪{hazardʹs+l − Expected Response for lag l ← mean(I) Output the expected response for each lag l. Fig. 4. Expected Death Hazard IRF for LSTM Survival Model: Influences of 10 % Standard Deviation Increases. P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

survival model, indicating a strong Markov property with respect to the covariates that the future death hazard depends primarily on the most current information, with minimal influence from the past. This inter­ pretation aligns with the Efficient Market Hypothesis that future market dynamics depend only on new information but not on the history [73]. 6.2. Non-linear effect of covariates Cox survival model falls in the category of generalized linear models (GLMs), which allows a linear model to be related to a dependent var­ iable via a link function. GLMs are generally interpretable because they provide estimated coefficients that indicate the effect of each covariate. However, due to their relatively simple structures, GLMs may not cap­ ture complex relationships. Their interpretability is often limited by their linear combination of covariates and the pre-defined nonlinear link function. As a result, more subtle non-linear effects of covariates might not be fully captured. For example, a relationship that appears linear in a GLM might actually be better represented by a convex, concave, or even Deep learning models are known for their capability to capture complex nonlinear effects [9]. In this study, we employ partial de­ pendency plots (PDP) to evaluate the nonlinear effect of covariates on cryptocurrencies’ death hazard. PDP is a model-agnostic method often used to show the marginal effect of one variable on the predicted outcome of a machine-learning model [74]. To calculate the PDP, we individually introduce a series of perturbations to each covariate of in­ terest and observe the resulting changes in the average hazard rate over the following day. The perturbations introduced to the continuous var­ iables, log(TradingVolume + 1), log(MarketCap + 1), and price vola­ tility range evenly from −0.5σ to 0.5σ, where σ is the standard deviation of the normalized covariates, while the changes introduced to Num­ DaysSinceLastMention range from 0 to 60 days. The PDPs obtained using the LSTM and the transformer survival models are presented in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively. The PDPs provide new yet consistent insights. For example, both the LSTM and the transformer survival models demonstrate that log(Tra­ dingVolume + 1) and log(MarketCap + 1) have a convex decreasing relationship with the next-day hazard, NumDaysSinceLastMention volatility has a concave increasing relationship with the next-day haz­ ard, while price volatility has a convex increasing relationship with the next-day hazard. These results not only provide further support for all four hypotheses but also offer additional insights. For example, the convex decreasing relationship between trading volume and the next- day hazard implies that an increase in trading volume predicts a Fig. 5. Expected Death Hazard IRF for Transformer Survival Model: Influences of 10 % Standard Deviation Increases. P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

marginally diminishing negative effect on the next-day hazard. 7.1. Summary of findings, theoretical contribution, and practical This research investigates tradable assets’ "natural death" using time- dependent Cox regression and two proposed deep-learning survival models. We also designed a post-hoc interpretability algorithm to help explain the deep learning survival models. Our results suggest that a negative shock to social media attention, trading volume, and market capitalization, and a positive shock to price volatility, predicts a higher risk of cryptocurrency "death" in the following days. Our research offers valuable implications for research by demon­ strating a method to obtain interpretable insights from deep learning models for hypothesis testing using post-hoc interpretability algorithms and partial dependence plots. These interpretability approaches reveal more realistic, versatile, and detailed relationships between covariates than linear models. In the context of longitudinal data analysis, such as this study, this methodology can be used to identify both the lagged effect and the nonlinear effect of the covariates. In the finance literature, there have been efforts to understand the termination of tradable assets such as stock delistings [18,38,39]. However, these failure events are governed by predetermined regula­ tions [1], so that the “natural death” is not observable. Furthermore, there isn’t a theory that explains how the implicit hazard of tradable assets might change over time. Our study is the first to investigate the “natural death” of tradable assets under market equilibrium, free from enforced trading termination orders. We show how the trading activity of an asset may gradually come to a stop even without enforced termi­ nation. Our study is also the first to use the cryptocurrency market to theorize the relationship between the tradable asset hazard rate and several important factors such as social media attention, trading volume, and market capitalization. The identification of such a relationship was not possible in previous literature because delisting events are deter­ ministic in the stock market due to regulations. This research also contributes to the survival modeling literature by identifying important drawbacks of the conventional Cox regressions and introducing a framework to develop deep learning survival models that could outperform Cox regressions in “death” prediction and in analyzing the lagged and nonlinear effects of the covariates. Our findings offer significant practical implications as well. For example, institutional investors in cryptocurrency markets can leverage the study’s results to set up alerts for cryptocurrencies at risk of failure. By closely monitoring the hazard rate changes for each cryptocurrency Fig. 6. Partial Dependency Plot for LSTM Survival Model. P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

in their portfolio, they can make timely adjustments to their investments to avoid investment loss. Moreover, financial institutions could develop risk profiles or investment ratings for cryptocurrencies based on their hazard rates over time. These indicators would assist in identifying cryptocurrencies that are worth investing in or in selecting crypto­ currencies to invest for portfolios with varying levels of risk tolerance. 7.2. Limitations and future research opportunities We recognize two main limitations in this study and suggest corre­ sponding areas for future research. First, with the archival data we collected, the models do not establish causality. Future studies could use the same cryptocurrency market context to explore causal relationships, providing more actionable business insights. Second, some crypto­ currencies have "resurrected" after their initial failure. While our study only focuses on the first "death," investigating these "resurrection" events could also be valuable in identifying profitable investment opportu­ nities. Future research could explore research questions such as which types of cryptocurrencies are likely to resurrect and what leads to such This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. CRediT authorship contribution statement Peng Xie: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptu­ alization. Nan Li: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptuali­ zation. Hongwei Du: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Declaration of competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Fig. 7. Partial Dependency Plot for Transformer Survival Model. P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

[1] G.C. Sanger, J.D. Peterson, An empirical analysis of common stock delistings, J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 25 (1990) 261–272, https://doi.org/10.2307/2330828. [2] P.R. Chandy, S.K. Sarkar, N. Tripathy, Empirical evidence on the effects of delisting from the national market system, J. Econ. Financ. 28 (2004) 46–55, https://doi. [3] J. Park, K. Shiroshita, N. Sun, Y.W. Park, Involuntary delisting in the Japanese stock market, Manag. Financ. 44 (2018) 1155–1171, https://doi.org/10.1108/MF- [4] A. Marosi, N. Massoud, Why do firms go dark? J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 42 (2007) [5] S. Chava, R.A. Jarrow, Bankruptcy prediction with industry effects, Rev. Financ. 8 [6] J.R. Ritter, The long-run performance of initial public offerings, J. Finance. 46 [7] D.A. Hensler, R.C. Rutherford, T.M. Springer, The survival of initial public offerings in the aftermarket, J. Financ. Res. 20 (1997) 93–110, https://doi.org/10.1111/ [8] C. Lee, W.R. Zame, J. Yoon, M. Van Der Schaar, DeepHit: a deep learning approach to survival analysis with competing risks, in: 32nd AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. AAAI [9] S. Liang, R. Srikant, Why deep neural networks for function approximation?, in: in: 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. ICLR 2017 - Conf. Track Proc, 2017, https://doi. [10] D.X. Zhou, Universality of deep convolutional neural networks, Appl. Comput. Harmon. Anal. 48 (2020) 787–794, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acha.2019.06.004. [11] P. Linardatos, V. Papastefanopoulos, S. Kotsiantis, Explainable ai: a review of machine learning interpretability methods, Entropy 23 (2021) 18, https://doi.org/ [12] X. Li, H. Xiong, X. Li, X. Wu, X. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Bian, D. Dou, Interpretable deep learning: interpretation, interpretability, trustworthiness, and beyond, Knowl. Inf. Syst. 64 (2022) 3197–3234, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10115-022-01756-8. [13] D.R. Cox, Regression models and life-tables, J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B. 34 (1972) [14] V. Bewick, L. Cheek, J. Ball, Statistics Review 12: Survival analysis, Crit. Care, [15] D. Borˇsiˇc, A. Kavkler, Modeling unemployment duration in slovenia using cox regression models, Transit. Stud. Rev. 16 (2009) 145–156, https://doi.org/ [16] R. Agarwal, Survival of firms over the product life cycle, South. Econ. J. 63 (1997) [17] Sanizah Ahmed, Determinants of marital dissolution: a survival analysis approach, Int. J. Econ. Stat. 2 (2014) 348–354. [18] E. Kashefi Pour, M. Lasfer, Why do companies delist voluntarily from the stock market? J. Bank. Financ. 37 (2013) 4850–4860, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. [19] T. Shumway, Forecasting bankruptcy more accurately: a simple hazard model, J. Bus. 74 (2001) 101–124, https://doi.org/10.1086/209665. [20] M. Stepanova, L. Thomas, Survival analysis methods for personal loan data, Oper. Res. 50 (2002) 277–289, https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.50.2.277.426. [21] P.D. Allison, Survival Analysis Using SAS: A practical Guide, 2nd Edition, 2010. [22] T. Verdonck, B. Baesens, M. ´Oskarsd´ottir, S. vanden Broucke, Special issue on feature engineering editorial, Mach. Learn. 13 (2024) 3917–3928, https://doi.org/ [23] J. Cao, Z. Li, J. Li, Financial time series forecasting model based on CEEMDAN and LSTM, Phys. A Stat. Mech. Its Appl. 519 (2019) 127–139, https://doi.org/10.1016/ [24] S. Dara, P. Tumma, Feature extraction by using deep learning: a survey, in: Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Electron, Commun. Aerosp. Technol. ICECA, 2018, p. 2018, https:// [25] Y. Lecun, Y. Bengio, G. Hinton, Deep learning, Nature 521 (2015) 436–444, [26] A. Adadi, M. Berrada, Peeking Inside the Black-Box: A Survey On Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI), IEEE Access, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1109/ [27] D. Gunning, DARPA’s explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) program, in: 2019. [28] D.V. Carvalho, E.M. Pereira, J.S. Cardoso, Machine learning interpretability: a survey on methods and metrics, Electron 8 (2019) 832, https://doi.org/10.3390/ [29] A. Nguyen, J. Yosinski, J. Clune, Deep neural networks are easily fooled: high confidence predictions for unrecognizable images, in: Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput, Vis. Pattern Recognit, 2015, https://doi.org/10.1109/ [30] R. Jia, P. Liang, Adversarial examples for evaluating reading comprehension systems, in: EMNLP 2017 - Conf. Empir. Methods Nat. Lang. Process. Proc, 2017, [31] L.H. Gilpin, D. Bau, B.Z. Yuan, A. Bajwa, M. Specter, L. Kagal, Explaining explanations: an overview of interpretability of machine learning, in: Proc. - 2018 IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Data Sci, Adv. Anal. DSAA, 2018, p. 2019, https://doi.org/ [32] M. Sundararajan, A. Taly, Q. Yan, Axiomatic attribution for deep networks, in: 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. ICML, 2017, p. 2017. [33] A. Shrikumar, P. Greenside, A. Kundaje, Learning important features through propagating activation differences, in: 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. ICML, 2017, [34] M.T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, C. Guestrin, why should i trust you?” explaining the predictions of any classifier, in: NAACL-HLT 2016 - 2016 Conf. North Am. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguist. Hum. Lang. Technol. Proc. Demonstr. Sess, 2016, https:// [35] S.M. Lundberg, S.I. Lee, A unified approach to interpreting model predictions, in: Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst, 2017, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1705.07874. [36] T. SHUMWAY, The delisting bias in CRSP data, J. Finance. 52 (1997) 327–340, [37] C. Leuz, A. Triantis, T.Yue Wang, Why do firms go dark? Causes and economic consequences of voluntary SEC deregistrations, J. Account. Econ. (2008), https:// [38] L. You, A.M. Parhizgari, S. Srivastava, Cross-listing and subsequent delisting in foreign markets, J. Empir. Financ. 19 (2012) 200–216, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. [39] T. Shumway, V.A. Warther, The delisting bias in CRSP’s Nasdaq data and its implications for the size effect, J. Finance. 54 (1999) 2361–2379, https://doi.org/ [40] S.J.G.J.E. Stiglitz, On the impossibility of informationally efficient markets, Am. Econ. Rev. 70 (1980) 393–408. https://www.jstor.org/stable/1805228. [41] H. Hong, J.C. Stein, A unified theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and overreaction in asset markets, J. Finance. 54 (1999) 2143–2184, https://doi.org/ [42] R.C. Merton, An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model, Econometrica, 1973, [43] P.G. Audia, H.R. Greve, Less likely to fail: low performance, firm size, and factory expansion in the shipbuilding industry, Manage. Sci. 52 (2006) 83–94, https://doi. [44] J.M. KARPOFF, A theory of trading volume, J. Finance. 41 (1986) 1069–1087, [45] M.K. Brunnermeier, L.H. Pedersen, Market liquidity and funding liquidity, Rev. Financ. Stud. 22 (2009) 2201–2238, https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhn098. [46] M. O’Hara, X. (Alex) Zhou, Anatomy of a liquidity crisis: corporate bonds in the COVID-19 crisis, J. Financ. Econ. 142 (2021) 46–68, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. [47] P. Xie, H. Chen, Y.J. Hu, Signal or noise in social Media discussions: the role of network cohesion in predicting the Bitcoin market, J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 37 (2020) [48] M.M.L. Wasko, S. Faraj, Why should I share? Examining social capital and knowledge contribution in electronic networks of practice, MIS Q. Manag. Inf. Syst. 29 (2005) 35–57, https://doi.org/10.2307/25148667. [49] N. Gradojevic, I. Tsiakas, Volatility cascades in cryptocurrency trading, J. Empir. Financ. 62 (2021) 252–265, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jempfin.2021.04.005. [50] D.G. Baur, T. Dimpfl, The volatility of Bitcoin and its role as a medium of exchange and a store of value, Empir. Econ. 61 (2021) 2663–2683, https://doi.org/10.1007/ [51] M. Hasan Miraz, M. Tariq, R. Akhter, Trust, transaction transparency, volatility, facilitating condition, performance expectancy towards cryptocurrency adoption through intention to use, J. Manag. Inf. Decis. Sci. 25 (2022) 1–20. [52] B.S. Low, S. Zhang, The volatility risk premium embedded in currency options, J. Financ. Quant. Anal. 40 (2005) 803–832, https://doi.org/10.1017/ [53] G. Bakshi, N. Kapadia, Delta-hedged gains and the negative market volatility risk premium, Rev. Financ. Stud. 16 (2003) 527–566, https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/ [54] H. Markowitz, Portfolio selection Harry Markowitz, J. Finance. 7 (1952) 77–91. [55] W.C. Wei, The impact of Tether grants on Bitcoin, Econ. Lett. 171 (2018) 19–22, [56] L. Kaiser, S. St¨ockl, Cryptocurrencies: herding and the transfer currency, Financ. Res. Lett. 33 (2020) 101214, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2019.06.012. [57] P. Xie, The interplay between investor activity on virtual investment community and the trading dynamics: evidence from the bitcoin market, Inf. Syst. Front 24 [58] F. Mai, Z. Shan, Q. Bai, X. (Shane) Wang, R.H.L. Chiang, How does social Media impact bitcoin value? A test of the silent majority hypothesis, J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 35 (2018) 19–52, https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2018.1440774. [59] M.B. Rao, J.P. Klein, M.L. Moeschberger, Survival analysis techniques for censored and truncated data, Technometrics 40 (1998) 159–160, https://doi.org/10.2307/ [60] S.T. Bharath, A.K. Dittmar, Why do firms use private equity to opt out of public markets? Rev. Financ. Stud. 23 (2010) 1771–1818, https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/ [61] H. Mehran, S. Peristiani, Financial visibility and the decision to go private, Rev. Financ. Stud. 23 (2010) 519–547, https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhp044. [62] H. Chen, P. De, Y. Hu, B.H. Hwang, Wisdom of crowds: the value of stock opinions transmitted through social media, Rev. Financ. Stud. 27 (2014) 1367–1403, [63] T. Loughran, B. Mcdonald, When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis, dictionaries, and 10-ks, J. Finance 66 (2011) 35–65, https://doi.org/10.1111/ P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

[64] S. Siami-Namini, N. Tavakoli, A. Siami Namin, A comparison of ARIMA and LSTM in forecasting Time Series, in: Proc. - 17th IEEE Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Appl. ICMLA, 2018, p. 2019, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMLA.2018.00227. [65] S. Hochreiter, J. Schmidhuber, Long short-term memory, Neural Comput 9 (1997) [66] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A.N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, I. Polosukhin, Attention is all you need, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 30 (2017), [67] Y. Lu, J. Lu, A universal approximation theorem of deep neural networks for expressing probability distributions, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33 (2020) [68] M. Taylor, A. Taylor, The technology life cycle: conceptualization and managerial implications, Int. J. Prod. Econ. 140 (2012) 541–553, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. [69] W.F.M. De Bondt, R. Thaler, Does the stock market overreact? J. Finance. 40 [70] A.J. Richards, Winner-loser reversals in national stock market indices: can they be explained? J. Finance. 52 (1997) 2129–2144, https://doi.org/10.2307/2329478. [71] S.J. Larson, J. Madura, Overreaction and underreaction in the foreign exchange market, Glob. Financ. J. 12 (2001) 153–177, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1044-0283 [72] A. Ivashchenko, Corporate bond price reversals, J. Financ. Mark. 68 (2024), [73] E.F. Fama, Efficient Capital Markets: a review of theory and empirical work, J. Finance. 25 (1970) 383–417, https://doi.org/10.2307/2325486. [74] B.M. Greenwell, pdp: an R package for constructing partial dependence plots, R J 9 Dr. Peng Xie is an associate professor at the College of Business and Economics, California State University, East Bay. He received his Ph.D. in Business Administration and Man­ agement from Scheller College of Business at Georgia Institute of Technology. His research interests include social media analytics, blockchain technology, financial technology (FinTech), artificial intelligence, and business analytics. He mainly uses econometrics, machine learning, natural language processing, and other analytical models in his research. His works have appeared in journals such as Journal of Management Information Systems, Information and Management, Information System Frontiers, Information Technology and People, and elsewhere. Dr. Nan Li received her doctoral degree in management from Shanghai University of Finance and Economics. Now, she is an accounting faculty member at Shanghai University of International Business and Economics. Her research mainly focuses on accounting in­ formation systems, corporate governance, and capital market. Dr. Hongwei Du is the Chair of the Department of Management, College of Business and Economics at California State University, East Bay. He holds a Ph.D. in Operations Research from Florida Institute of Technology, a M.S. in Computer Science from Bowling Green State University and a M.S. in System Engineering from Beijing Institute of Auto­ mation. His research projects have been published in the European Journal of Information Systems, the Journal of Economic Studies, the Journal of Supply Chain and Operations Man­ P. Xie et al. Information & Management 62 (2025) 104215

---NEW PAPER---

Academic Editors: Anna Maria D’Arcangelis and Giulia Rotundo Received: 30 September 2025 Revised: 18 November 2025 Accepted: 30 November 2025 Published: 15 December 2025 Citation: Konuk, D. E., & Güvenir, H. A. (2025). Predicting the Risk of Death for Cryptocurrencies Using Deep Learning. Journal of Risk and Financial Management, 18(12), 716. https:// Copyright: © 2025 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license Predicting the Risk of Death for Cryptocurrencies Using Do˘ga Elif Konuk * and Halil Altay Güvenir Department of Computer Engineering, Bilkent University, 06800 Ankara, Türkiye; guvenir@cs.bilkent.edu.tr The rapid rise in the popularity of cryptocurrencies has drawn increasing attention from investors, entrepreneurs, and the public in recent years. However, this rapid growth comes with risk: many coins fail early and become what are known as “dead coins”, defined by a lack of recorded activity for more than a year. This study applies deep learning techniques to estimate the short-term risk of a cryptocurrency’s death. Specifically, three Recurrent Neural Network architectures, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), Bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM), and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), were trained on 18-month time series of daily closing prices and trading volumes using a stratified five-fold cross-validation framework. The models’ predictive performances were compared across input windows ranging from 10 to 180 days. Using the previous 180 days of data as input, GRU achieved the highest point accuracy of 0.7134, whereas BiLSTM exhibited the best performance when evaluated across input sequence lengths varying from 10 to 180 days, reaching an average accuracy of 0.676. These findings show the ability of recurrent architectures to anticipate short-term failure risks in cryptocurrency markets. Theoretically, the study contributes to financial risk modeling by extending time series classification methods to cryptocurrency failure prediction. Practically, it provides investors and analysts with a data-driven early-warning tool to manage portfolio risk and reduce potential losses. Keywords: LSTM; BiLSTM; GRU; cryptocurrency; time series classification; dead coins In recent years, cryptocurrencies have gained popularity due to advantages such as enabling peer-to-peer transactions without intermediary financial institutions and provid- ing secure and private financial transfers (Mirza et al., 2023). Since Bitcoin’s introduction as a peer-to-peer electronic cash system by Nakamoto (2008), the market has expanded significantly, with CoinMarketCap tracking 18.67 million cryptocurrencies as of July 2025 (CoinMarketCap, 2025). One of the main reasons behind the popularity of cryptocurren- cies is their potential to generate substantial long-term profit for investors. For example, Bitcoin’s price has increased roughly tenfold over the last five years, despite experiencing periods of sharp volatility during that time (Edwards, 2025). As noted by some cryptocur- rency supporters, investors also appreciate that cryptocurrencies eliminate the need for central banks to control the money supply, since such banks are often linked to inflation and a decline in money’s value (Rosen, 2025). Although cryptocurrencies can yield high returns, they are also highly susceptible to significant losses in value due to the fluctuating nature of the cryptocurrency market. For example, Bitcoin has seen significant collapses, losing 61% of its value in 2014, 73% in 2018, J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 and 64% in 2022, despite growing thousands of percent since its founding (Royal, 2025). More recently, the crypto market experienced a crash that wiped out over $19 billion in leveraged positions between 10 and 11 October 2025 (ArunKumar et al., 2025). During this crash, Bitcoin fell by roughly 13% from its all-time high of over $126,000, and the impact was even more severe for altcoins, since tokens such as Solana, Sui, and several memecoins lost more than 40% of their value within minutes. Fluctuations in the value of a cryptocurrency may result from macroeconomic factors that influence the overall financial landscape, while they can also be affected by characteris- tic parameters of a coin, such as market activity, trading volume, closing price, opening price, and similar indicators. On the macroeconomic side, the classical supply–demand relationship plays a crucial role, as rising demand relative to a fixed supply can drive up the value of cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin (Rosen, 2025). Conversely, when supply is unlimited and demand falls, prices tend to decrease, and episodes of overselling or overbuying can create sharp market fluctuations (Tiao, 2025). Moreover, high interest rates might motivate investors to move their money from low-utility or speculative coins to safer assets, such as savings accounts. Similarly, during times of uncertainty, such as wars or economic crises, people tend to avoid risky financial moves, which can affect the cryptocurrency market. According to a case study, the start of the COVID-19 pandemic caused a crypto-rush, followed by an inverse trend as many investors left the market later (Jabotinsky & Sarel, 2023). In addition to these influences, attempts to interfere with the decentralized nature of cryptocurrencies, such as discussions about bringing regulations to the crypto market by the governments, can result in a decline in their value (Tiao, 2025). Such events, triggering fluctuations in the market, can also result in the disappearance of certain cryptocurrencies from the market. Many other factors, such as the level of trust given to investors by the founder of a cryptocurrency, negative social media sentiments, or scandals, can lead to a rapid decline in a coin’s trading volume. For example, a leading cryptocurrency exchange, FTX, crashed in November 2022 after it was revealed that its affiliate, Alameda Research, relied heavily on speculative tokens (Reiff, 2024). This led to the withdrawals of many customers and the bankruptcy of both companies, causing significant disruption in the cryptocurrency market. Aside from scams, cryptocurrencies that are created as jokes or memes often lose their validity due to lack of practicality, while legitimate coins can become dead coins due to insufficient funding, developer departure, or declining market interest (Ledger Academy, 2025).These examples illustrate that while cryptocurrencies can be highly profitable, they also expose investors to serious risks such as sharp market drops, unexpected regulatory decisions, and the possibility that a coin may A cryptocurrency that has lost almost all its value or is no longer usable is known as a “dead coin”(Ledger Academy, 2025). According to industry standards, cryptocurrencies are usually categorized as defunct or “dead” if their trading volume over three months is less than USD 1000 (Ledger Academy, 2025). Currently, there is not a formal definition of dead coins in the professional and academic literature (Fantazzini, 2022). Within the scope of this study, a dead coin is defined as a cryptocurrency with no activity within the past year. While there are many external factors affecting the value fluctuations and death of a cryptocurrency, these factors are hard to track and use for future predictions. On the other hand, quantitative parameters of a coin, categorized as time series data, can provide insights into whether the coin will continue to be traded or lose its value over time. These predictions can be useful for investors to manage their cryptocurrency portfolios and In the context of time series, the goal of forecasting is to predict exact values, whereas classification assigns data to distinct categories based on its past behavior. Time Series

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 Classification (TSC) is the task of training a classifier with sequential time series data to learn a mapping from input sequences to a probability distribution over possible class labels (Fawaz et al., 2019). In many real-world scenarios, especially financial applications, classi- fication of data can be more useful for decision-making than forecasting. This change in approach has led to the development of many TSC methods, particularly for use in finance. This study places special emphasis on classifying time series data by predicting whether a cryptocurrency will become dead within the upcoming 10-day period. By analyz- ing the risk of cryptocurrencies’ dying, investors can reduce potential losses and enhance their portfolio management strategies. The classifications were based solely on the coins’ characteristics, specifically daily closing prices and trading volumes. We retrieved the time series data used in this study from Nomics1. Historically, TSC problems have been solved with various methodologies such as k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) and Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) (Abanda et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2018). In more recent years, machine learning and deep learning methodologies have surfaced, and they have been used for many time series forecasting and classifica- tion problems. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are particularly useful for capturing temporal patterns between data; hence, they are commonly used for sequential prediction problems (Tessoni & Amoretti, 2022). In a study comparing various machine learning and deep learning models for forecasting Bitcoin price trends, RNNs were found to outperform other architectures, highlighting their effectiveness for cryptocurrency-related prediction tasks (Goutte et al., 2023). Among them, the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) models demonstrated particularly strong performance, further sup- porting their suitability for modeling financial time series data. Therefore, LSTM, GRU, and Bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM) architectures, which are specific forms of RNNs, are selected in this study to assess their performance in predicting the risk of cryptocurrencies The main objectives of this study can be summarized as follows: Creating variations of deep learning models using LSTM, GRU, and BiLSTM architec- tures by systematically altering the number of layers and units per layer to analyze their impact on predictive performance. Extending financial risk theory by framing cryptocurrency failure as a time series classification problem rather than a forecasting task, linking the concept of “death risk” to survival analysis perspectives within cryptocurrency markets. Training these models with time series data of trading volume and closing price values of cryptocurrencies to predict the risk of a coin becoming dead within the following 10 days and selecting the best-performing model for each architecture. Providing a data-driven warning system that helps investors and portfolio managers spot coins showing early signs of inactivity or collapse and offering timely information for safer risk-management and investment decisions in a highly volatile market. Improving methodological understanding by systematically comparing LSTM, GRU, and BiLSTM architectures under consistent experimental conditions and multiple historical input windows of 10 to 180 past days to evaluate how the length of past data influences the performance of predicting a coin’s death risk within the follow- ing 10 days. The comparative results clarify how network depth, bidirectionality, and gating mechanisms influence performance when modeling financial time series with irregular activity patterns, providing guidance for applying deep learning to risk assessment in volatile markets such as cryptocurrencies and other emerging The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives insights about the related workworks in the literature. Section 3 describes the dataset used in the study

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 and its related preprocessing steps along with deep learning architectures used in the experiments. Sections 4 and 5 outlines the details of the experiment procedure and analyzes the results. Finally, the study is concluded with Section 5, explaining theoretical and practical implications, limitations, and suggestions for future work. 2. Review of Literature Data instances recorded sequentially over time are referred to as time series data, which consist of ordered data points that carry meaningful information (Fawaz et al., 2019). Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are the most widely used machine deep learning models for sequential prediction problems (Tessoni & Amoretti, 2022). Within the family of RNNs, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) architectures are widely used for modeling long-term dependencies in time series data, as they effectively address challenges such as vanishing gradients (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). These architectures have become popular for time series forecasting applications due to their ability to capture complex temporal patterns. Financial forecasting is also a key area that benefits from historical financial time series data to predict trends in the market and provide strategical insights to investors and speculators (Tang et al., 2022). For instance, Fister et al. (2021) developed LSTM-based models for stock trading, achieving robust portfolio performance in the German financial market. Similarly, Sivadasan et al. (2024) trained LSTM and GRU networks using the technical indicators (TIs) and open, high, low, and close (OHLC) features of various stocks to predict the opening prices of the stocks for the following day. In this study, GRU achieved higher accuracy in most cases, reducing Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) to 0.62% for Google stock, compared to LSTM’s 1.05%. Likewise, Lawi et al. (2022) constructed eight models with different preprocessing and regularization steps for forecasting the stock prices of the companies AMZN, GOOGL, BLL, and QCOM. Although the models showed competing performance, it was significant that the four models combined with GRU outperformed the other four models combined with LSTM on the stock prices of AMZN, GOOGL, BLL, and QCOM, with accuracies of 96.07%, 94.33%, 96.60%, and 95.38%, respectively. Time series analysis can be applied to study cryptocurrency performance, and many studies already focus on forecasting their future values. Some of these studies propose hybrid deep learning approaches for cryptocurrency price prediction. For example, Patel et al. (2020) proposed a hybrid model combining LSTM and GRU to forecast Litecoin and Monero prices over the next 1, 3, and 7 days. Although the proposed model did not present an effective result for the next 7 days, it outperformed traditional LSTM by reducing the Mean Squared Error (MSE) from 194.4952 to 5.2838 for Litecoin and 230.9365 to 10.7031 for Monero for 1-day forecasts, demonstrating strong performance in short-term price prediction. In another research, Dip Das et al. (2024) integrated the encoder–decoder prin- ciple with LSTM and GRU along with multiple activation functions and hyperparameter tuning for trend predictions in the stock and cryptocurrency market. For various individual stocks, stock index S&P, and Bitcoin as a cryptocurrency, autoencoder–GRU (AE-GRU) architecture significantly outperformed autoencoder–LSTM (AE-LSTM) architecture, with a higher prediction accuracy. In particular, AE-GRU obtained 0.5% MAPE for Bitcoin trend prediction, which is half of the value found with AE-LSTM. In another study, four methods, including a convolutional neural network (CNN), hybrid CNN-LSTM network (CLSTM), multilayer perceptron (MLP), and radial basis function neural network (RBFNN), were compared to predict the trends of six cryptocurrencies, including Bitcoin, Dash, Ether, Litecoin, Monero, and Ripple, within the next minute using 18 technical indicators. For all cryptocurrencies, CLSTM outperformed other architectures, with an accuracy of 79.94% on Monero and 74.12% on Dash cryptocurrencies (Alonso-Monsalve et al., 2020).

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 In another study, Fleischer et al. (2022) examined the performance of LSTM in predict- ing the prices of Electro-Optical System (EOS), Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Dogecoin cryptocur- rencies only using their historical closing prices. The results were compared to the ARIMA approach using the RMSE (Root Mean Squared Error) metric. LSTM outperformed ARIMA for all cryptocurrencies, showing a 72–73% reduction in RMSE for EOS and Dogecoin, which have greater fluctuations in their closing prices compared to Bitcoin and Ethereum, demonstrating that LSTM performs significantly well for highly volatile cryptocurrencies. In a comparative study, Seabe et al. (2023) implemented LSTM, GRU, and BiLSTM, trained on the daily closing prices of Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Litecoin cryptocurrencies in the last five years to forecast their prices. RMSE and the MAPE performance metrics were used to analyze the performance of the models, and BiLSTM surpassed other models with a MAPE value of 0.036 for Bitcoin, 0.124 for Ethereum, and 0.041 for Litecoin. In another study by Golnari et al. (2024), a probabilistic approach referred to as Probabilistic Gated Recurrent Unit (P-GRU) was proposed, incorporating stochasticity into the traditional GRU by enabling the model weights to have their distinct probability distributions in order to tackle the challenge coming from the volatile nature of cryptocurrencies, focusing on the prediction of Bitcoin prices. This novel method outperformed the other simple, time- distributed, and bidirectional variants of GRU and LSTM networks. The study was also expanded to predict the prices of six other cryptocurrencies by using transfer learning with the P-GRU model, contributing to the overall inquiry for cryptocurrency price prediction. In line with our study, Özuysal et al. (2022) proposed a method for assessing the death risk of cryptocurrencies over 30, 60, 90, 120, and 150 days, based on their past 30-day data of closing prices and daily trading volumes. In this study, a simple RNN architecture was used for capturing temporal patterns in the data. The study showed that the probability of identifying dead cryptocurrencies increases with longer prediction windows, starting from roughly 37% for the prediction of death in the next 30 days, and reaching nearly 84% for the 150-day horizon. Building on this research, Sakino˘glu and Güvenir (2023) proposed and experimented with four different techniques for constructing training datasets for an LSTM model to predict whether a cryptocurrency will die within the next 30 days. However, from the investors’ point of view, it is more valuable to estimate the risk in the near future. Building on these, our study applies special forms of RNNs to predict the death risk of cryptocurrencies in the following 10 days using varying number of input days. By providing short-term predictions, this approach may help protect investors from the risk of holding cryptocurrencies that are likely to fail rapidly. 3. Materials and Methods The data preprocessing steps and methodology used are described in the follow- 3.1. Data Description and Preprocessing The dataset2 is composed of time series data for cryptocurrencies that died by 1 March 2023. We found 7312 such cryptocurrencies. According to our definition, the last transaction on these dead cryptocurrencies occurred before 1 March 2022. The dataset includes daily trading volume and closing price values for these cryptocurrencies, collected from a commercial data source. Each cryptocurrency in the dataset spans a period longer than 18 months, including at least 180 days of trading activity followed by 12 months of complete inactivity. The 180-day portion represents the historical input window used for model training, while the subsequent inactive year verifies the classification of the coin as “dead”. Hence, the total

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 available data for each coin exceeds the prediction horizon, and the labeling process remains Even though cryptocurrency markets operate continuously, some coins, especially the ones that are getting close to inactivity, show days where no transactions are recorded. As a result, there are missing entries in the dataset which reflects days without any trading activity. During preprocessing, missing volume values were set to zero and missing closing prices were replaced with the most recent available closing price. In order to be used in the experiments, time series data for at least 2(dp + d f −1) days are needed, where dp is the number of past days and d f is the number of future days. Only cryptocurrencies that have lived for at least 180 days, providing sufficient historical data to generate both positive and negative instances for the largest input window (dp = 180), are included in the experiments; currencies with shorter lifespans are removed. In all experiments, d f = 10, since we are interested in predicting if a cryptocurrency will die in the next 10 days. The dp values we experimented with are 10, 20, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, and 180. Since both the volume and closing price values have large differences among the cryptocurrencies, we applied z-score normalization to each volume and closing price data for each remaining cryptocurrency. The problem is to estimate how accurately we can predict if a cryptocurrency will die in the next d f days, given its time series data from the past dp days. In preparing the dataset, we opt to have a balanced number of positively and negatively labeled time series data. A positive instance represents the time series data of a cryptocurrency that will live less than d f days; similarly a negative instance represents the data of a cryptocurrency that will live d f days or more. Given the time series data for a cryptocurrency, d f positive (P-labeled) and the same number of negative (N-labeled) instances are created, as shown in Figure 1. Each instance consists of the time series data with a length of dp days. Positive instances are formed from the last d f days, while negative instances are randomly selected from the previous days. Figure 1. Creation of negative and positive instances from the time series data of 10 days (dp = 3, d f = 2). Each dot represents a day. When d f = 2, two positive and two negative instances are constructed. Each data point is three days long. The number of cryptocurrencies with sufficient data and the number of instances created for each experiment are shown in Table 1. Table 1. Data size for each experiment (dp: length of past data, # cryptocurrencies: number of cryptocurrencies with sufficient data, and # instances: number of instances created, for d f = 10).

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 Three specialized RNN architectures, LSTM, BiLSTM, and GRU, were used in this study. Their respective model structures are explained in detail in the following subsections. 3.2.1. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) LSTM is a type of RNN, addressing the vanishing gradient problem of conventional RNNs. The architecture of the LSTM cell is displayed in Figure 2. The diagram highlights how the architecture preserves long-term dependencies (Ingolfsson, 2021). The forget gate ft selectively removes data that are no longer relevant in the cell state by applying a sigmoid function to the current input xt and the previous hidden state ht−1. Outputs near 0 lead to forgetting, while values near 1 retain information. The input gate it adds new information to the cell state by first applying a sigmoid function to Xt and ht−1, determining which values to update. It uses a sigmoid function to filter relevant information and combines it with a candidate vector generated via tanh to update the memory. The final cell state update Ct is computed by the following equations: ft = σ(Wf Xt + Uf ht−1 + bf ) it = σ(WiXt + Uiht−1 + bi) ˆCt = tanh(WCXt + UCht−1 + bC) Ct = ft ⊙Ct−1 + it ⊙ˆCt where W∗, U∗, b∗are learned parameters (weights and biases). Figure 2. Structure of an LSTM {cell showing the flow of information through forget, input, and output gates. The diagram highlights how the architecture preserves long-term dependencies (Ingolfsson, 2021). The output gate ot determines what information from the cell state is passed on as output. It applies a tanh function to the cell state and filters the result using a sigmoid gate based on xt and ht−1 using the following equations: ot = σ(WoXt + Uoht−1 + bo) ht = ot ⊙tanh(Ct) 3.2.2. Bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM) Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory, or BiLSTM, is a powerful RNN that can pro- cess sequences both forward and backward. It improves performance on tasks containing sequential data by capturing both past and future contexts through the use of two distinct LSTM layers, one for each direction. BiLSTM architecture is illustrated in Figure 3. This

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 bidirectional design enables the model to learn contextual information from previous and future time steps simultaneously (Naik & Jaidhar, 2022). Figure 3. BiLSTM Architecture of a BiLSTM network that processes input sequences in both forward and backward directions. This bidirectional design enables the model to learn contextual information from previous and future time steps simultaneously (Naik & Jaidhar, 2022). 3.2.3. Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) GRU is a type of RNN designed to capture temporal dependencies in sequential data while using a simplified gating mechanism compared to LSTM. The architecture of the GRU cell is depicted in Figure 4. GRU The figure shows how GRU simplifies the LSTM architecture while retaining the ability to capture temporal dependencies (Huang et al., 2019). GRU updates its hidden state based on the current input xt and the previous hidden state ht−1, processing sequential data one element at a time. Using these elements, a candidate activation vector ˜ht is calculated at each time step. The hidden state is then updated for the following time step using this candidate vector. Figure 4. Structure of a Cellcell, including reset and update gates. The figure shows how GRU simplifies the LSTM architecture while retaining the ability to capture temporal dependencies (Huang et al., 2019).

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 Candidate activation vector ˜ht is computed using the update gate zt and the reset gate rt. The update gate balances the contribution of the candidate vector and the previous hidden state ht−1, while the reset gate determines how much of the old hidden state to forget. Final hidden state ht is calculated using the following equations: rt = σ(Wrxt + Urht−1) zt = σ(Wzxt + Uzht−1) ˜ht = tanh(Whxt + Uh(rt ⊙ht−1)) ht = (1 −zt) ⊙ht−1 + zt ⊙˜ht where W∗, U∗are learned parameters (weights and biases). 4. Experiments and Results The evaluation procedure employed stratified five-fold cross-validation to ensure balanced representation of both active and dead coins in each fold. In each run, four folds were used for training and one for testing, and this process was repeated five times. The reported accuracy and AUC values are the averages across the five folds. All models were trained and evaluated on the same cross-validation splits to allow direct performance comparison. Standard deviations of the cross-validated accuracies were computed to assess the consistency of results. For each of the LSTM, BiLSTM, and GRU experiments, we used 500 training epochs, a batch size of 64, and a validation split of 0.2. The number of layers and units per layer varied to find the highest accuracy for each model. To avoid overfitting, early stopping with a patience of 50 was applied based on validation accuracy, dropout layers with a rate of 0.2 and L2 weight regularization were used, and model selection was performed according to validation rather than training performance. For each combination of the number of layers and units per layer, the number of days used as input was varied with the following values D = {10, 20, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180}. The performance of the models was evaluated using the average accuracy values across validation steps. ACC(d) and AUC(d) represent the accuracy and Area Under Curve obtained for d number of days used in training, respectively. AUC was calculated to assess the model’s ability to rank cryptocurrencies according to their likelihood of dying. To investigate overall performance across varying input lengths, the average accuracy and average AUC across all input window sizes were computed for each combination of layer and unit configurations as in These metrics form the fundamental basis for comparing model performance. For LSTM, a total of ten different combinations of layer and unit per layer configura- tions were tested, and the best-performing ones out of these configurations are presented in Table 2. The highest accuracy and overall AUC values in the table are shown in bold. Each entry represents the mean ± standard deviation of the evaluation metrics obtained from the five-fold stratified cross-validation procedure. The relatively small standard deviations (typically below ±0.02) confirm the stability of the LSTM models across folds. The highest accuracy of 0.7018 was achieved with four layers and 64 units. Although it yielded the

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 highest point accuracy, the corresponding accuracy curve exhibited significant fluctuations, which led to a lower overall AUC value compared to other configurations. Meanwhile, the highest overall AUC of 0.7689 was obtained with one layer and 32 units. Table 2. Highest performing number of layer and unit combinations of LSTM. The accuracy curves of different numbers of layers and units are displayed in Figure 5. The figure shows how accuracy generally increases with longer historical windows but varies by number of layers and number of units per layer. As illustrated, an accuracy of approximately 0.63 was achieved using a 10-day historical window. As the window size gradually increased up to 180 days, a general upward trend in accuracy was observed. The performance of the LSTM architecture is notably influenced by the number of layers and units, which leads to distinct characteristics in the resulting accuracy curves. The con- figuration with four layers and 64 units per layer achieved the highest accuracy of 0.7018; however, the corresponding curve exhibited a substantial drop around the 120-day mark, indicating potential instability. To reduce the impact of such an instability and to evaluate overall performance across varying historical window sizes, the average accuracy was calculated. The LSTM configuration with four layers, each containing 32 units, achieved the best accuracy, Avg_ACC = 0.6701, and the highest AUC, Avg_AUC = 0.7293, making it the best-performing LSTM network across varying numbers of past training days. Figure 5. Accuracy curves of the LSTM network for different layer and configurations (Ln_um, in which n and m are the number of layers and units per layer, respectively). For GRU configurations, a single-layer architecture was tested with a different number of units per layer, ranging from 8 to 176. The highest accuracy values from these con-

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 figurations were achieved by the mid-range configurations. These values are shown in Table 3. Each result shows the mean ± standard deviation of the evaluation metrics obtained through the five-fold stratified cross-validation. The GRU models exhibited slightly higher stability across folds, with standard deviations lower than 0.011 compared to values up to 0.018 for the LSTM models. The configuration with 96 units gave the highest values for both accuracy and overall AUC, which are 0.7134 and 0.7817, respectively. Table 3. Highest performing number of Layer and unit combinations of GRU. Among the multi-layer GRU configurations, only the two-layer and four-layer se- tups with 32 units per layer were included in the final graph, as they outperformed other multi-layer GRU variants. However, increasing the number of layers did not improve the performance of the GRU, as the highest accuracy values were consistently achieved with single-layer architectures, as shown in Table 3. The accuracy curves of all the GRU architectures considered are illustrated in Figure 6. The figure illustrates the gradual improvement in accuracy with longer input windows. The curves exhibited minor fluctu- ations, indicating a near-linear trend in accuracy rising from approximately 0.63 to 0.71. The single-layer configuration with 96 units per layer achieved the highest accuracy of Avg_ACC = 0.6759, along with the highest AUC of Avg_AUC = 0.7385 across all varying Figure 6. Accuracy curves of GRU network with varying number of layers and units per layer. For BiLSTM configurations, four variants were evaluated, which are one-layer with averaged hidden states, two-layer with averaged hidden states, one-layer with concatenated hidden states, and two-layer with concatenated hidden states, respectively. Among these,

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 the two-layer averaged configuration achieved the highest average accuracy; hence its results are presented in the analysis. The BiLSTM experiments included a two-layer architecture evaluated with 12 different numbers of units per layer, ranging from 8 to 176. In addition, a four-layer configura- tion with 32 units per layer was tested based on the promising results observed in the LSTM experiments. However, this setup did not yield the best performance for BiLSTM. The highest accuracy values obtained for BiLSTM are presented in Table 4. Reporting the mean ± standard deviation from the five-fold stratified cross-validation, the results showed that the BiLSTM models also achieved consistent performance, with standard deviations consistently lower than ±0.02. The configuration with 80 units per layer achieved the highest point accuracy of 0.7098, whereas the configuration with 112 units per layer yielded the highest overall AUC of 0.7801. Both results were obtained using 180 past days as input. Table 4. Highest performing number of layer and unit combinations of BiLSTM. The accuracy curves for all tested BiLSTM configurations are presented in Figure 7 to il- lustrate their comparative performance across varying historical window sizes. The results show overall improvement with longer historical windows and strong performance from several two-layer architectures.The best-performing configuration based on the average accuracy and AUC values for varying past training days was the two-layer BilSTM with 112 units per layer. This configuration achieved an accuracy of Avg_ACC = 0.676 and AUC of Avg_AUC = 0.7377. The remaining configurations produced closely comparable results. Figure 7. Accuracy of BiLSTM models across different layer–unit configurations and input windows.

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 The best-performing configurations of LSTM, GRU, and BiLSTM are illustrated in Figure 8. Overall, all architectures exhibit an upward trend in accuracy, increasing from approximately 0.63 to 0.71 as the number of past days increases.The figure summarizes how all architectures achieve increasing accuracy with longer input histories, with BiLSTM slightly outperforming the others on average. Figure 8. Final performance comparison of LSTM, GRU, and BiLSTM models.The figure summarizes how all architectures achieve increasing accuracy with longer input histories, with BiLSTM slightly outperforming the others on average. The average accuracy and AUC values for the best-performing configurations of LSTM, GRU, and BiLSTM are summarized in Table 5. Based on these metrics, BiLSTM slightly outperformed the other models in terms of accuracy across varying number of Table 5. Final performance comparison of LSTM, GRU, and BiLSTM. This study examined how recurrent deep learning architectures can be used to estimate the short-term failure risk of cryptocurrencies. By analyzing daily closing prices and trading volumes of more than seven thousand coins, three models, LSTM, GRU, and BiLSTM, were evaluated with accuracy as the primary evaluation metric. The models produced similar accuracy values overall. However, LSTM exhibited the lowest accuracy and the most fluctu- ating performance among the experiments. On the other hand, GRU achieved the highest point accuracy of 0.7134 with a 180-day input window, while BiLSTM demonstrated the best overall performance across varying input lengths with an average accuracy of 0.676. These findings demonstrate that Recurrent Neural Networks can capture temporal depen- dencies in cryptocurrency data and provide reliable early-warning signals for potential

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 failures. The conclusions of the study are discussed under three perspectives: theoretical implications, practical implications, and research limitations with future directions. The death of a cryptocurrency can be influenced by two distinct categories of fac- tors: intrinsic characteristics of the coin itself, such as closing price, trading volume, and market activity, and external macroeconomic conditions that shape the broader financial environment. This study contributes to the theoretical literature by reframing cryptocur- rency failure prediction as a time-series classification problem, extending survival-analysis concepts into the digital-asset domain. The comparative evaluation of LSTM, GRU, and BiLSTM architectures enhances understanding of how recurrent neural networks model nonlinear dependencies and volatility in financial data. For all three models, accuracy improved as the number of past days used as input increased, showing that having more historical data makes the predictions more reliable. The models produced similar accuracy values overall. However, LSTM exhibited the lowest accuracy and the most fluctuating performance between the experiments. On the other hand, GRU achieved the highest point accuracy of 0.7134 with a 180-day input window, while BiLSTM demonstrated the best overall performance across varying input lengths. Furthermore, no clear correlation was observed between the number of layers and the number of units per layer for any of the models. The optimal model configuration can be identified through exploration of various architecture combinations. These observations strengthen theoretical knowledge of RNNs and validate their relevance to financial risk modeling. From a practical standpoint, the models developed in this study provide a data- driven early-warning framework for investors, portfolio managers, and exchanges. Overall, our findings suggest that it is possible to predict that a cryptocurrency will die in the next 10 days with roughly 70% accuracy by analyzing its performance over the last six months. This window provides investors with sufficient time to assess risk and sell the cryptocurrency they hold before a potential failure, allowing early liquidation of vulnerable assets. The system can also help cryptocurrency exchanges and regulators identify coins that are becoming risky or difficult to trade. Although cryptocurrencies lack formal redemption mechanisms, sudden spikes in trading volume often resemble a digital version of a “bank run” behavior, signaling potential collapse. Detecting such patterns can guide risk management in highly volatile crypto markets. 5.3. Research Limitations and Future Work Despite promising results, the study has several limitations that point to future re- search opportunities. Although macroeconomic factors may influence the death of a cryptocurrency, many are difficult to track or quantify due to limited data availability. This constraint represents a limitation of the present study, which therefore focuses on closing prices and trading volumes, as they are more consistent and accessible for cryptocurrencies. There are several different definitions for the death of a cryptocurrency (Fantazzini, 2022). We chose the definition as transaction inactivity for at least one year. This is the limitation of this work based on the definition of dead cryptocurrency. As long as the time series data about the daily transactions for a cryptocurrency can be converted into positive and negative labeled time series instances, the methodology used in this study can be applied to any definition of dead cryptocurrencies. Incorporating factors such as sentiments of investors, developer activity, and regula- tory announcements could improve model robustness. Furthermore, experimenting with historical windows longer than 180 days and training the models with a larger number of

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 cryptocurrencies may enhance generalizability and better capture long-term trends in a cryptocurrency’s behavior. Future work may also investigate, hybrid architectures that combine LSTM, GRU, and BiLSTM components to potentially achieve improved predictive performance. Although the models in this study were treated as predictive black boxes, understanding their decision process is an important future goal. The predictions are driven by temporal patterns in closing prices and trading volumes, yet the specific contributions of these variables were not analyzed in detail. Future research will focus on incorporating explainable AI methods such as SHAP values, attention visualization, or gradient-based attributions to show which time-based patterns have the strongest impact on the model’s predictions. Finally, early liquidity withdrawals or redemption-like signals could be found by examining transaction-level or on-chain data, connecting theoretical models with real Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.A.G.; methodology, D.E.K. and H.A.G.; software, D.E.K.; validation, H.A.G.; formal analysis, H.A.G.; investigation, D.E.K.; resources, D.E.K.; data curation, H.A.G.; writing—original draft preparation, D.E.K.; writing—review and editing, H.A.G.; visualization, D.E.K.; supervision, H.A.G.; project administration, H.A.G. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. Funding: This research received no external funding. Data Availability Statement: Data will be made available on request. Acknowledgments: During the preparation of this manuscript/study, the author(s) used [ChatGPT, 4] for the purposes of formatting citation references, finding grammatical mistakes, and checking coherence and flow. The authors have reviewed and edited the output and take full responsibility for the content of this publication. Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results. The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript: Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory https://nomics.com/. Developer of a crypto application programming interface designed to permit cryptocurrency trading. The company sunset their API product on 31 March 2023. Data will be made available on request. Abanda, A., Mori, U., & Lozano, J. A. (2019). A review on distance based time series classification. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, Alonso-Monsalve, S., Suárez-Cetrulo, A. L., Cervantes, A., & Quintana, D. (2020). Convolution on neural networks for high-frequency trend prediction of cryptocurrency exchange rates using technical indicators. Expert Systems with Applications, 149, 113250.

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 ArunKumar, K. E., Kalaga, D. V., Kumar, C. M. S., Chilkoor, G., Kawaji, M., & Brenza, T. M. (2025). Forecasting the dynamics of cumulative COVID-19 cases (confirmed, recovered and deaths) for top-16 countries using statistical machine learning models: Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) and Seasonal Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average (SARIMA). Applied Soft Computing, 103, 107161. [CrossRef] CoinMarketCap. (2025). Cryptocurrencies tracked by CoinMarketCap. CoinMarketCap Charts. Available online: https://coinmarketcap .com/charts/number-of-cryptocurrencies-tracked/ (accessed on 21 July 2025). Dip Das, J., Thulasiram, R. K., Henry, C., & Thavaneswaran, A. (2024). Encoder–Decoder based LSTM and GRU architectures for stocks and cryptocurrency prediction. Journal of Risk and Financial Management, 17(5), 200. [CrossRef] Edwards, J. (2025). Bitcoin’s price history. Investopedia. Retrieved 21 July 2025. Available online: https://www.investopedia.com/ articles/forex/121815/bitcoins-price-history.asp (accessed on 29 November 2025). Fantazzini, D. (2022). Bitcoin’s price history Crypto-coins and credit risk: Modelling and forecasting their probability of death. Journal of Risk and Financial Management, 15(7), 304. [CrossRef] Fawaz, H. I., Forestier, G., Weber, J., Idoumghar, L., & Muller, P.-A. (2019). Deep learning for time series classification: A review. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 33(4), 917–963. [CrossRef] Fister, D., Perc, M., & Jagriˇc, T. (2021). Two robust long short-term memory frameworks for trading stocks. Applied Intelligence, 51(7), Fleischer, J. P., von Laszewski, G., Theran, C., & Parra Bautista, Y. J. (2022). Time series analysis of cryptocurrency prices using long short-term memory. Algorithms, 15(7), 230. [CrossRef] Golnari, A., Komeili, M. H., & Azizi, Z. (2024). Probabilistic deep learning and transfer learning for robust cryptocurrency price prediction. Expert Systems with Applications, 255, 124404. [CrossRef] Goutte, S., Le, H.-V., Liu, F., & von Mettenheim, H.-J. (2023). Deep learning and technical analysis in cryptocurrency market. Finance Research Letters, 54, 103809. [CrossRef] Hochreiter, S., & Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8), 1735–1780. [CrossRef] Huang, Z., Yang, F., Xu, F., Song, X., & Tsui, K.-L. (2019). Convolutional gated recurrent unit–recurrent neural network for state-of- charge estimation of lithium-ion batteries. IEEE Access, 7, 93139–93149. [CrossRef] Ingolfsson, T. M. (2021). Insights into LSTM architecture. Available online: https://thorirmar.com/post/insight_into_lstm/ (accessed on 22 June 2025). [CrossRef] Jabotinsky, H. Y., & Sarel, R. (2023). How crisis affects crypto: Coronavirus as a test case. UC Law SF Law Review, 74(2), 433. Available online: https://repository.uclawsf.edu/hastings_law_journal/vol74/iss2/6 (accessed on 21 July 2025). Lawi, A., Mesra, H., & Amir, S. (2022). Implementation of long short-term memory and gated recurrent units on grouped time-series data to predict stock prices accurately. Journal of Big Data, 9(1), 89. [CrossRef] Available online: https://www.ledger.com/academy/glossary/dead-coin (accessed on 21 July 2025). [CrossRef] Mirza, A. M., Fernando, Y., Mergeresa, F., Wahyuni-Td, I. S., Ikhsan, R. B., & Fernando, E. (2023, November 7–8). Psychological risk, security risk and perceived risk of the cryptocurrency usage. 2023 IEEE 9th International Conference on Computing, Engineering and Design (ICCED) (pp. 1–5), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCED60214.2023.10425190. Naik, D., & Jaidhar, C. (2022). A novel multi-layer attention framework for visual description prediction using bidirectional LSTM. Journal of Big Data, 9, 6. [CrossRef] Nakamoto, S. (2008). Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3440802 (accessed on Özuysal, H., Atan, M., & Güvenir, H. A. (2022). Kripto para birimlerinin ölme riskinin tahmini. Gazi ˙Iktisat ve ˙I¸sletme Dergisi, 8(3), Patel, M. M., Tanwar, S., Gupta, R., & Kumar, N. (2020). A deep learning-based cryptocurrency price prediction scheme for financial institutions. Journal of Information Security and Applications, 55, 102583. [CrossRef] The collapse of FTX: What went wrong with the crypto exchange? .investopedia.com/what-went-wrong-with-ftx-6828447#toc-the-bottom-line (accessed on 21 July 2025). [CrossRef] Rosen, A. (2025, May 22). Cryptocurrency basics: Pros, cons and how it works. NerdWallet. Available online: https://www.nerdwallet.com/ article/investing/cryptocurrency (accessed on 21 July 2025). [CrossRef] Royal, J. (2025, August 19). The 3 biggest Bitcoin crashes in history—And how to spot the next one before it happens. Available online: https://www.bankrate.com/investing/biggest-bitcoin-crashes-in-history/ (accessed on 17 November 2025). Sakino˘glu, B., & Güvenir, A. (2023, July 23–25). Predicting the risk of death of cryptocurrencies. 2023 IEEE International Conference on Omni-layer Intelligent Systems (COINS) (pp. 1–6), Berlin, Germany. [CrossRef] Seabe, P. L., Moutsinga, C. R. B., & Pindza, E. (2023). Forecasting cryptocurrency prices using LSTM, GRU, and bi-directional LSTM: A deep learning approach. Fractal and Fractional, 7(2), 203. [CrossRef]

J. Risk Financial Manag. 2025, 18, 716 Sivadasan, E. T., Mohana Sundaram, N., & Santhosh, R. (2024). Stock market forecasting using deep learning with long short-term memory and gated recurrent unit. Soft Computing, 28, 3267–3282. [CrossRef] Tang, Y., Song, Z., Zhu, Y., Yuan, H., Hou, M., Ji, J., Tang, C., & Li, J. (2022). A survey on machine learning models for financial time series forecasting. Neurocomputing, 512, 363–380. [CrossRef] Tessoni, V., & Amoretti, M. (2022). Advanced statistical and machine learning methods for multi-step multivariate time series forecasting in predictive maintenance. Procedia Computer Science, 200(C), 748–757. [CrossRef] Tiao, G. C. (2025). Time series: ARIMA methods. What drives crypto prices? In J. D. Wright (Ed.), International encyclopedia of the social & behavioral sciences (2nd ed., pp. 316–321). Elsevier. [CrossRef] Wang, W., Lyu, G., Shi, Y., & Liang, X. (2018, November 23–25). Time series clustering based on dynamic time warping. 2018 IEEE 9th International Conference on Software Engineering and Service Science (ICSESS) (pp. 487–490), Beijing, China. [CrossRef] Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

---NEW PAPER---

Journal of Accounting & Vol. 22 No. 7, 2026 prediction: a machine learning approach in the era of big data Department of Economic and Management Sciences, University of Parma, Andrea Melioli and Flavio Bertini Department of Mathematical, Physical and Computer Sciences, University of Parma, Parma, Italy Received 26 May 2025 Revised 7 October 2025 Accepted 9 November 2025 © Gianluca Gabrielli, Andrea Melioli and Flavio Bertini. Published by Emerald Publishing Limited. This article is published under the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) licence. Anyone may reproduce, distribute, translate and create derivative works of this article (for both commercial and non-commercial purposes), subject to full attribution to the original publication and authors. The full terms of this licence may be seen at http://creativecommons.org/licences/by/4.0/ Funding: This research was granted by University of Parma through the action “Bando di Ateneo 2025 per la ricerca” (FIL_2025_PROGETTI_B_BERTINI, CUP: D93C25001130005). Purpose – This study aims to evaluate the efficacy of modern machine learning classifiers, random forest, gradient boosting trees, decision trees, support vector machines and logistic regression, in forecasting corporate bankruptcy among Italian firms, aiming to surpass traditional credit-scoring approaches by leveraging rich financial data. Design/methodology/approach – Using a comprehensive panel of 1,826,157 firm–year observations (532,255 active; 76,464 bankrupt) from 1980 to 2019, the authors compare models trained on different data configurations, while addressing class imbalance through undersampling and advanced synthetic minority over-sampling technique (SMOTE) techniques. Models are validated on held-out samples, regional subsets and an out-of-time test (2016–2017), with performance gauged by area under the curve (AUC), F1-score, precision, recall and specificity. Findings – Ensemble methods (random forest and gradient boosting) outperform other classifiers, particularly when using raw accounting inputs, achieving AUCs near 0.99 and F1-scores up to 0.98; resampling enhances robustness without diminishing predictive power, and variable-importance analysis underscores capital- structure metrics as key early warning indicators. Originality/value – To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first large-scale Italian bankruptcy study to juxtapose ratio-based models with high-dimensional raw data under multiple SMOTE variants, revealing that comprehensive financial statement variables markedly improve predictive accuracy and offering novel insights for both researchers and risk practitioners. Keywords Financial distress, Machine learning, Random forest, Bankruptcy prediction, SMOTE Paper type Research paper Predicting corporate bankruptcy is a longstanding problem in accounting, auditing and finance, with clear implications for lenders, auditors, supervisors and managers. Methodologies have evolved with advances in data availability and computation, form early statistical models to modern artificial intelligence approaches, including machine learning and Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

deep learning (Moll and Yigitbasioglu, 2019; Ranta et al., 2023). Because firm failure can propagate real-economy losses, accurate early-warning systems are valuable for decision- making. Our focus in on bankruptcy prediction (the probability a firm enters form insolvency), or credit scoring at loan origination (Climent et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2012). Since the paper by Beaver (1966), many studies followed a conventional approach using a dichotomous variable (1 for bankrupt, 0 for active company). The conventional explanatory variables used in bankruptcy prediction typically consist of accounting ratios derived from financial statements. Among models built on accounting ratios, those developed by Altman (1968) and Ohlson (1980) became the milestones and continue to be used by researchers to detect financial distress. Alternative studies use factors not related to accounting. One example is the study by Bottazzi et al. (2011) focusing on productivity and growth. Another is Mueller and Stegmaier (2015) focusing on the size and age of firms, and others are Daily and Dalton (1994), Darrat et al. (2016), Liang et al. (2020) and Hazami-Ammar (2024), who study corporate governance indicators. Balcaen and Ooghe (2006) and Habib et al. (2020) have conducted extensive and comprehensive reviews. They provide in-depth analysis and insights into these topics. In addition, Jackson and Wood (2013) discuss the use of accounting measures as predictors of bankruptcy. It is important to acknowledge that these methods present some constraints. These methods can be sensitive to issues such as multicollinearity, outliers and missing data, which can affect the accuracy and reliability of the results. These limitations, together with the growth of large administrative databases, have spurred wider use of machine learning for distress prediction (Alaka et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2016; Desai et al., 2023; Liang et al., 2020; Ravi Kumar and Ravi, 2007; Tang et al., 2020). Our empirical design is guided by the idea that bankruptcy is less a sudden event than the endpoint of resource attrition and slack exhaustion. Financial statements provide direct, low-level measures of that process: profitability and margins speak to the ability to generate rents; cash, working capital and undrawn credit reflect deployable slack; leverage and interest expense capture constraints on discretion. When buffers shrink and claims tighten, managerial room to reallocate resources narrows, pushing failure risk higher. Because these mechanisms unfold over time, we expect multiyear raw accounting items, which retain the levels and paths of resources and obligations, to carry more predictive content than constructed ratios that compress or normalize away that information. This theoretical lens motivates our choice to compare ratios with two raw-item configurations and to evaluate models in an out-of-time setting that mirrors real early-warning use. Two literatures are most relevant. First, bankruptcy prediction in accounting and finance: foundational ratio-based models remain widely used (Altman, 1968; Beaver, 1966; Ohlson, 1980), while more recent benchmarks, often US centric, combine accounting and market variables and evaluate on rolling samples (Campbell et al., 2008). Second, a growing stream of research advocates raw financial statements items rather than ratios for certain prediction tasks; for example, Bao et al. (2020) study accounting fraud in US listed firms with three-based ensembles. The foundation of the accounting system lies in raw accounting data, making its potential role in bankruptcy prediction a compelling area of exploration Our study contributes by bringing a systematic raw-vs-ratio comparison to bankruptcy prediction and by ng so in a nonbank oriented setting. We compare three feature designs: ratios, a compact raw accounting data set and a near-full raw financial statement set, built from the last three fiscal years. We evaluate five classifiers: random forest (RF), gradient boosting (GBT), decision trees (DT), support vector machines (SVM) and logistic regression (LR). Finally, we emphasize strict out- of-time testing and imbalance-aware training with calibration and robustness checks. By focusing on Italy, where creditor rights, firm size distribution and reporting practices differ from the USA, we provide external-validity evidence on whether raw-item machine learning predictors travel across institutional regimes. Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

This paper stands out from previous studies firstly because it uses a significantly larger sample; our data set includes 532,255 active companies and 76,464 bankrupt companies and uses the last three financial statements. Because class imbalance can bias estimation, we implement random undersampling and synthetic minority over-sampling technique (SMOTE), including different extension of the original methodology, to test robustness. Our progressive design evaluates whether models that ingest raw accounting data, can surpass traditional ratio- based approaches and whether results hold under different sampling strategies, regions and out- of-sample and out-of-time validations. We also speak to the emerging discussion on the theoretical foundations of machine learning in accounting (Bertomeu, 2020). This has been possible using a progressive approach in testing the model. This approach is based on the use of a growing amount of accounting data obtained by reports that composed the comprehensive Across all settings, RF delivers the strongest performance, with GBT and DT close behind; LR and SVM are weaker. Models using raw accounting items outperform ratio-only designs, consistent with the RBV/slack lens that emphasizes resource levels and trajectories. Robustness checks by region and strict out-of-time splits confirm these patterns. The paper proceeds as follows. Sections 2 and 3 present the related literature and theoretical background. Section 4 details the research design, data and sample selection. Section 5 reports empirical results and robustness analyses. Section 6 concludes. Early bankruptcy prediction models relied on univariate, multivariate, logit and probit techniques (Altman, 1968; Beaver, 1966; Edmister, 1972). Beaver (1966) used univariate analysis, testing 30 financial ratios one at a time on a sample of 79 firms in a paired sample. He found that working capital/debt was the most significant ratio for the classification in terms of discriminant power, followed by the net income/total assets ratio (Beaver, 1966). Altman (1968) introduced multivariate discriminant analysis (MDA), using five ratios to create a linear discriminant function, achieving high accuracy but declining performance over extended time horizons (Altman, 1968). Later studies, such as Edmister (1972) and Deakin (1972), expanded these methods by incorporating more financial ratios. Despite their early success, MDA and similar method faced significant limitations, including multicollinearity, sensitivity to outliers and strict assumptions of linearity and normality (Balcaen and Ooghe, 2006). To address these issues, researchers adopted logit and probit models, which estimate conditional probabilities of bankruptcy (Ohlson, 1980). Since the early studies by Ohlson (1980) and Zmijewski (1984), several contributions have gone on to use conditional models to predict business failure (Becchetti and Sierra, 2003; Charitou et al., 2004; Gloubos and Grammatikos, 1988; Hillegeist et al., 2004; Jones and Hensher, 2007; Keasey et al., 1990; Mossman et al., 1998; Zavgren, 1985). However, while more flexible, these models did not substantially improve classification rates (Son et al., 2019) and remained constrained by assumption about variable independence, data distribution, outliers and missing values (Balcaen and Ooghe, 2006). Traditional statistical models are characterized by strict assumptions on linearity, normality and independence among predictor variables and preexisting functional forms relating to criterion and predictor variable reduce their real-world applications (Hua et al., 2007). Recognizing these limitations, scholars turned to machine learning techniques, which offer greater adaptability and the ability to process complex, high- dimensional data (Wang et al., 2012). Since the 1990s, the advent of machine learning and then deep learning transform bankruptcy prediction, significantly improving accuracy over traditional statistical methods. Various algorithms, particularly RF, SVM and GBT, have demonstrated superior performance. Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Barboza et al. (2017) compared statistical models with machine learning approaches and found that RF outperforms Altman’s Z-score model, consistently with other studies (Joshi et al., 2019; Petropoulos et al., 2020; Rustam and Saragih, 2018). Similarly, SVM has been widely applied, achieving good results in various financial contexts (Chen, 2011; Du Jardin, 2017; Gogas et al., 2018; Song et al., 2018; Tsai, 2020). Beyond tree-based models, neural networks have gained popularity for bankruptcy prediction. Research demonstrates that they outperforms better than traditional models, despite challenges related to interpretability (Du Jardin, 2010; Lee et al., 2005; López Iturriaga and Sanz, 2015). Ravisankar and Ravi (2010) tested novel neural network structures on a cross-country data set, improving accuracy, sensitivity and specificity. DTs have also been used to predict bankruptcy, with Du Jardin (2017), Fitzpatrick and Mues (2016) and Olson et al. (2012) showing higher performance using them. Kwak et al. (2012) applied machine learning approaches, such as DT and SVMs, to predict bankruptcy in Korea and found Hosaka (2019) used convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on Japanese listed companies to identify their potential for detecting bankruptcy. Findings show that the “common” methods (e.g. discriminant analysis, SVM and AdaBoost) are outperformed by CNNs analysis. Mai et al. (2019) show that the combination of textual and accounting data can improve predictive power of deep learning algorithms. Among deep learning models, generic artificial neural networks have often been used, with promising results, to predict business failure, as shown by various studies (Neves and Vieira, 2006; Chou et al., 2017; Du Jardin, 2018; Kim et al., 2016; Lee and Choi, 2013; Oreski and Oreski, 2014). The application of ensemble classifiers appears to enhance bankruptcy prediction. Ensemble machine learning is based on the combination of multiple models and thus aims to restrict the error of a single base learner. Jones et al. (2015) and Jones (2017) show that GBT and similar methods offer higher performance than both conventional classification methods and sophisticated statistical learning techniques, such as neural networks and SVM (Hastie et al., 2009; Schapire and Freund, 2012). Generally, the predictive power of an ensemble learner is higher than that of a base classifier. Accounting and finance literature acknowledges the validity of boosting models for bankruptcy prediction, and there is also agreement in other scientific fields that they have significant predictive power. Bagging (Breiman, 1996) and boosting (Schapire, 1990) are the most frequently applied techniques. Kim and Kang (2010) run a comparison of neural networks using boosting and bagging with neural networks which do not use them. They obtained improved performance when boosting and bagging techniques were used, with a slight advantage in terms of accuracy for the bagged model. Fedorova et al. (2013) tested a set of 888 firms from Russia comparing boosted neural networks with other techniques and the boosted model appeared to achieve highest overall accuracy. Boosting and bagging have also been applied to DT, and consistently with other algorithms, boosted ensembles outperform other classifiers. Achieving better performance than conventional models, GBT has been applied to bankruptcy prediction with good results. In fact, according to Jones (2017), GBT features make it possible to counter and overcome the constraints of traditional models, and the eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) performs better than other traditional applications. Zie¸ba et al. (2016) first used XGBoost on a data set made up of Polish firms, and found significantly better performance than traditional methods. Carmona et al. (2019) ran a comparison between XGBoost, LR and RF to evaluate their predictive power in the US banking industry, and once again, found substantial improvement in Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Other studies show the benefits of ensemble learning in terms of the accuracy of the prediction, especially when compared with SVM. Wang et al. (2014) developed a new boosted tree-based algorithm which proved to be more accurate than SVM. Heo and Yang (2014) tried to predict bankruptcy in Korea using an AdaBoost algorithm, comparing it with SVM and found greater accuracy for AdaBoost. These studies share a common feature; taking into account machine learning capability to handle large data sets, the training sample is small. Again, as discussed in the literature, feature representativeness in a sample is usually helpful in improving the performance and accuracy of models. Liang et al. (2015) examined the effect of applying filter and wrapper- based feature selection methods on model performance in bankruptcy prediction and credit scoring. Through the comparison of various methods for feature selection and ensemble classification, Lin et al. (2019) find that genetic algorithms such as the wrapper-based feature selection method give better performance than filter-based. Jadhav et al. (2018) suggest an innovative process to select features able to enhance credit rating through the combination of information gain and a genetic algorithm. Finally, the issue of bankruptcy prediction is commonly defined by significantly imbalanced data sets in which the number of active companies is higher than nonactive ones. Quantitative models which use a full sample may be affected by this and thus produce biased predictions. To overcome this problem, specific sampling techniques such as undersampling or oversampling can be used. Veganzones and Séverin (2018) show that great imbalance in a data set influences the performance of algorithms applied to the field of bankruptcy prediction, as prediction methods reward the majority class to the detriment of the minority class. They also report that resampling techniques can be useful, and that SMOTE is one the most efficient. Similar results have been obtained by Faris et al. (2020), their findings show increased performance as a consequence to SMOTE application. Together with the original version of SMOTE scholars have studies new extensions, some updates such as ADASYN, Borderline SMOTE or the combination with clustering techniques have begun to provide some interesting positive results (Garcia, 2022). Borderline SMOTE has been applied on polish context to predict bankruptcy by Smiti and Soui (2020), showing significant improvement in classification rate of machine learning algorithms. Shen et al. (2021) used ADASYN founding improved performance metrics. We view financial distress as the culmination of resource erosion and slack depletion that constrain adaptation. The resource-based view holds that survival depends on building and preserving valuable, rare and hard-to-imitate resource positions, while organizational slack, cash, working capital and borrowing headroom, buffers shocks and enables timely redeployment (Barney, 1991; Bourgeois, 1981). In financial statements, these mechanisms appear as level and trajectories of profitability, liquidity and leverage or interest burden. Accordingly, our predictors are not merely covariates but observable measure of resource stocks and constraints whose dynamics raise default hazard when slack is thin, and debt claims tighten. Following this RBV and slack lens raw accounting items can out-perform ratio-based analysis as they preserve information about the quantities and paths of resources that ratios can obscure. This view coheres with, and helps interpret, the canonical bankruptcy literature: accounting signals of deteriorating solvency and liquidity have long predicted failure (Beaver, 1966; Altman, 1968; Ohlson, 1980), and dynamic models that emphasize recent information further improve accuracy (Shumway, 2001). Market-informed work similarly ties higher failure risk to low profitability, high leverage, thin cash and volatile returns (Campbell et al., 2008). Complementing these statistical regularities, organizational Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

research shows that, as firms encounter threat, threat-rigidity responses, centralization, curtailed search and short-term retrenchment, can worsen capability renewal and slack, hastening decline (Staw et al., 1981; Weitzel and Jonsson, 1989). Together, these streams motivate our empirical choices: we use multi-year raw financial data to track resource and slack dynamics, and we evaluate models out-of-time to reflect the temporal evolution of failure risk. Evidence that small-firm distress follows similar accounting regularities, and benefits from tailored predictors, reinforces this perspective for nonblue-chip settings (Altman and Sabato, 2007). 4.1 Sample and data preprocessing We gather data about Italian firms from 1980 to 2019, categorizing them into two groups: bankrupt and active or continuing (nonbankrupt) firms. The original sample includes 114,495 bankrupt firms and 867,974 active firms. Figure 1 illustrates the regional distribution of firms, revealing a higher concentration in Northen Italy. Financial statements data was obtained from AIDA – Bureau Van Dijk and where possible manually integrated. To develop Figure 1. Region heatmap. Observation per regions Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

a robust predictive model, we conducted extensive data preprocessing and cleaning. First, we removed observations with missing financial statement values to ensure data completeness. Next, we excluded firms lacking three consecutive years leading up to bankruptcy date. We opted this threshold to maximize retained observations while ensuring predictive reliability. The resulting data set consists of 76,464 bankrupt firms and 532,255 active firms, totalling 1,826,157 firm-year observations, with each firm contributing data from its most recent three financial years. To our knowledge, this is the first study to handle a data set of this magnitude in bankruptcy prediction research. We constructed three data set panel with varying input variables. Panel A includes financial ratios (15 input variables) identified by practitioners and previous studies (Du Jardin and Séverin, 2011; Jones, 2017; Liang et al., 2016). Panel B, following the approach of Bao et al. (2020), used the raw accounting data used to compute the financial ratios (45 input variables). Then, given that this raw data is only a small part of the financial data contained in financial statements, we also followed the “brute force” approach suggested by Bao et al. (2020) in training and testing the model on a data set containing all the raw accounting data presented in financial statements (Panel C). This third data set thus consisted of all items contained in an annual report (215 input variables). This is possible because machine learning based models can handle very large amounts of features while remaining immune to irrelevant inputs. Preprocessing also covered variable standardization and missing value handling. Tree-based models (RF, DT, GBT) do not require standardization because they are scale-invariant (Hastie et al., 2009). Outliers were addressed by winsorizing features at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Missing values were imputed using year × industry medians estimated from the training data, and a binary missing-indicator was added for each imputed feature; ratios with zero or negative denominators were set to missing, flagged and then imputed. 4.1.1 Variables. Bankruptcy is classified as a binary variable, where bankrupt firms are coded as “1,” and an active firm are coded as “0.” However, unlike previous literature, we code as bankrupt only the year where the firm actually starts the bankruptcy procedure. Regarding input variables we use three different approaches. The first follows the widely accepted methods of using financial ratios, which have consistently demonstrated robust predictive power in bankruptcy research (Altman, 1968; Beaver, 1966; Jones et al., 2015). Over the years, various financial ratios have been used to assess business failure risk, with the most reliable indicators linked to working capital, cash flow, earnings and leverage (Beaver et al., 2005; Jones, 2017). Building on prior research, we selected financial ratios and also integrated them with ratios defined in the Italian Association of Certified Chartered Accountants “Code of crisis and insolvency” [1] (Consiglio Nazionale dei Dottori Commercialisti e degli Esperti Contabili, 2019). These ratios were specifically designed and tested on Italian insolvent firms to enable early detection of financial distress and have demonstrated higher predictive efficiency than traditional scoring models such as the Altman Z-score. Appendix 1 provides a detailed definition of the selected financial ratios. See Appendix 2 for descriptive statistics of main features used for the prediction, and for industries represented in the sample classified according to one-digit NACE codes. 4.1.2 Balancing the data set. After data cleaning and removing missing values, the final data set remained highly imbalanced with active firms comprising approximately 80% of the sample. Given that the objective of this research is to develop a classifier capable of identifying bankrupt companies, it is crucial to ensure that the model effectively learns from the minority class. To address this imbalance, we applied both undersampling and oversampling techniques. For undersampling, we use random undersampling, where observations from the majority class were randomly removed to create a more balanced data set. However, reducing the data set size can lead to information loss, so we also implemented Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

oversampling. Rather than using random resampling, which risks overfitting, we used the SMOTE as proposed by Chawla et al. (2002). SMOTE enhances the minority class representation by generating synthetic data points along the vector between and existing minority-class sample and its k-nearest neighbors (Ashraf and Ahmed, 2020). The literature suggests oversampling as the best approach for tasks like bankruptcy prediction (Veganzones and Séverin, 2018). SMOTE is the recognized as the most effective oversampling method (Lin et al., 2017), significantly improving model classification performance. Aware of this potential SMOTE have been updated with new extensions: Borderline-SMOTE, ADASYN, Safe-Level-SMOTE, DBSMOTE (Fernandez et al., 2018). To further validate our results, we explored three extensions, Borderline-SMOTE, ADASYN and K-means SMOTE. These advanced techniques refine sample generation by incorporating decision boundary adjustments, adaptive sampling and clustering approaches, ensuring a more representative 4.2 Machine learning models RF, GBT, DT, SVM and LR were trained and tested using a 70/30 random split of the data, following a widely used approach in the literature (Hastie et al., 2009). In addition, to ass out- of-sample performance, 25% of the training data was set aside for out-of-sample validations, ensuring a robust evaluation of model generalizability. Appendix 3 presents comparative table for your five methods All the models are implemented using Python. 4.2.1 Decision tree. DT is a supervised learning algorithm that classifies instances starting from a root node up to leaf nodes (Safavian and Landgrebe, 1991). The model follows a flowchart-like structure, where each node represents a decision rule, and leaf nodes correspond to class labels. These classifiers have recently become popular due to their powerful classification capability and intuitive interpretability (Gepp and Kumar, 2015). 4.2.2 Random forest. RF is a machine learning technique used for classification and regression tasks (Breiman, 2001). It constructs multiple DT applied on bootstrap replicates of original samples by randomly choosing k independent variables. It is robust to the presence of outliers and noise in the training sample (Yeh et al., 2014). The core concept of the algorithm is to introduce random perturbations in the learning system, ensuring differentiation among the trees and then aggregate their predictions using ensemble techniques. The model outputs the classification class based on majority voting from the DT, providing more precise forecasts and, most importantly, avoiding data overfitting. Randomizing both training samples and feature space, RF is able to improve performance, while however maintaining or even slightly increasing bias because of smaller variance. A key advantage over other machine learning algorithms is the ability to identify the contribution of each predictor in classification. It does not simply respond to a need for classification, but also supplies information explaining the result (Maione et al., 2016). With an approach similar to bagging, it generates continuously classification functions based on subsets. It avoids correlation in bootstrapped sets by randomly selecting a subset of characteristics from each node of the tree (Booth et al., 2014; Yeh et al., 2014). RF has also been shown resistant to overfitting 4.2.3 Gradient boosting. GBT is a widely used model in bankruptcy prediction. Proposed by Friedman (2001, 2002), known for its strong predictive accuracy (Gong et al., 2020; Landry et al., 2016). Unlike RF, which builds trees independently in parallel, GBT uses a sequential approach. It includes base learners as a weighted sum to reduce bias and variance and to reweight data that were previously misclassified. Since it strengthens scalability, it is used as the basis for many optimizations including XGBoost, LightGBT and Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

4.2.4 Logistic regression. LR is one of the most frequent models applied to predicting bankruptcy. It assumes that active and failed companies are detected using a logit tie between the input variable, and the output variable. From a mathematical point of view, a LR estimated using our sample is equivalent to a discrete hazard model, used in the past for bankruptcy prediction (Shumway, 2001). 4.2.5 Support vector machine. A SVM is a class of learning technique proposed in 1995 by Cortes and Vapnik (1995). The aim of this algorithm is the identification of the “hyperplane,” which is the maximum margin between two opposite classes, which in this case are bankrupt firms and active firms (Belavagi and Muniyal, 2016). Data are then plotted as a point for each class. The classification result is determined by the class the point belongs to. The nearest points to the optimal hyperplane are named support vectors (Belavagi and Muniyal, 2016). To compare the performance of the models we choose the following metrics: accuracy, precision, recall, specificity, F1-score and area under the curve (AUC). 4.3.1 Accuracy. Accuracy is one most widely used metrics for evaluating the performance of a machine learning model (Tharwat, 2018). It measures the amount of correctly classified items relative to the total test size. Ideally it is used to evaluate how well the classifier can correctly classify the elements, but very often it does not consider aspects such as accuracy in identifying a given class. In the first version of our model, it is not very useful as it does not work well with highly imbalanced data sets. It is however more useful in the second phase where resampling techniques rebalance the data set and the accuracy score can be estimated. Accuracy can be calculated as given in equation (1): Total number of observation where TP is true positive, i.e. bankrupt firms correctly classified, and TN is true negative, i.e. active companies correctly classified. A false negative is a bankrupt firm wrongly classified and a false positive is a firm that is not bankrupt wrongly classified as such. 4.3.2 Precision, recall and specificity. To avoid problems related to data set imbalance, three additional metrics are defined: precision, recall and specificity. Precision is the ratio of the number of correct predictions of a class over the total of the times the model predicts it. So, when a model is effective for a class, it usually makes good predictions in that class. Precision’s calculation is given by equation (2): The second metric, recall, is the ratio of how successfully the algorithm predicts positive values. It is also known as sensitivity and is computed as follows in equation (3): Specificity refers to the true negative rate and the probability of a negative test, on condition that it is truly negative. It is computed as follows in equation (4): Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Specificity quantifies how sensitive the model is to recognise a class, while specificity quantifies how specific the model is in distinguishing between classes. 4.3.4 F1-score. Precision and recall are used to compute the F1-score that represents their harmonic mean. It is a significant measure for evaluating the performance of model without balanced sample. This metric is determined as given by equation (5): TP + FP + FN 4.3.5 Area under the curve. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) is a probability curve that illustrates a model’s classification performance by mapping the false positive rate (FPR) on the x-axis and true positive rate on the y-axis. It effectively visualizes recall against 1-specificity, based on the model’s predicted bankruptcy probability. This graph helps evaluate model performance as FPR increases and can also be thought of as a diagram revealing Type I error. The AUC is the area under the ROC curve, and it is a frequently used to compare results of models developed on unbalanced data sets (Bradley, 1997). AUC values typically range from 0.5 to 1, where 0.5 indicates random guessing and 1 signifies perfect classification accuracy. AUC scores greater than 0.8 are proof of good and effective predictors. AUC values higher than 0.9 are viewed as sign of very strong classifiers showing an excellent balance between sensitivity and specificity. Note that for SVM the AUC is not applicable as the ROC curve requires probability estimates while the SVM provides the class labels directly as the outcome. Our analysis demonstrates that RF and GBT consistently achieve the highest predictive accuracy across all data sets. Notably, models using raw accounting data outperform those relying on financial ratios. Table 1 (Panel A) shows the results for the first version of the data set with 15 financial ratios as predictors. Panel B shows the results for the second version of the data set using raw accounting data used to determine financial ratios. Panel C shows the results for the third version of the data set containing all raw accounting data from financial statements. The data set is unbalanced, so the results of the accuracy ratio are ignored for the present while the AUC and the F1-score are discussed below. RF and GBT outperform other models in all the three versions of the data set, with DT close in terms of AUC. This results are consistent with previous contributions from literature that identified RF (Joshi et al., 2019; Rustam and Saragih, 2018), GBT (Carmona et al., 2019; Jones, 2017; Zie¸ba et al., 2016) and DT (Du Jardin, 2017; Fitzpatrick and Mues, 2016) as more efficient than other methods. The results also suggest that the model that includes financial ratios as predictors has a lower performance than the models including raw accounting data. The model that uses all financial items contained in the annual report offers the best results, with an AUC that is very close to 1. RF and GBT registered 0.99. Figure 2 graphically presents the results and compares the various algorithms applied. The trend is also confirmed by the F1-score where there is a strong and consistent improvement moving from the model with financial ratios to those with raw accounting data. In summary, we can conclude that RF, GBT and DT are the most effective machine learning methods for handling class imbalance, with RF showing superior performance. In Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

addition, the use of raw accounting data improves model accuracy compared to financial ratios alone, reinforcing the value of granular financial statement information. Aware of the limitations posed by imbalanced samples, we applied customized resampling techniques to evaluate the model’s performance. This approach also enabled us to incorporate accuracy as a metric for assessing the model’s effectiveness. Tables 2 and 3 present the results of applying SMOTE and random undersampling, confirming the robustness of our approach. These results are also graphically presented in Figures 3 and 4. Tables 2 focuses on SMOTE; Table 1. Main methods results Panel A – Unbalanced data set: financial ratios as input variables (15 features) Panel B – Unbalanced data set: raw data of financial ratios as input variables (45 features) Panel C – Unbalanced data set: raw data as input variables (215 features) Figure 2. AUC results: the random forest outperforms the other classifiers using the unbalance data set consisting of financial ratios Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

demonstrating that balancing the data set enhance the reliability of model performance. Models trained on raw accounting data (Panels B and C) consistently outperform those relying solely on financial ratios (Panel A), as reflected in higher AUC and F1-scores. These findings align with existing literature on oversampling techniques (Faris et al., 2020; Garcia, 2022; Veganzones and Séverin, 2018), though our study uniquely examines a significant larger data set. Across all Table 2. Results after Smote application Panel A – SMOTE oversampling: financial ratios as input variables (15 features) Panel B – SMOTE oversampling: raw data of financial ratios as input variables (45 features) Panel C – SMOTE oversampling: raw data as input variables (215 features) Table 3. Results after random undersampling application Panel A – Random undersampling: financial ratios as input variables (15 features) Panel B – Random undersampling: raw data of financial ratios as input variables (45 features) Panel C – Random undersampling: raw data as input variables (215 features) Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

models RF and GBT consistently achieve the highest predictive accuracy with AUC values of 0.99 and 0.98, respectively, when trained on raw data. Balancing the data set enables a more reliable evaluation using accuracy as a metric, further reinforcing the effectiveness of these models. RF, in particular, achieves a 98% accuracy when trained on full financial statements data. Even models based on financial ratios perform well, with RF, GBT and DT surpassing 80% accuracy, significantly outperforming LR and SVM. To sum up, using SMOTE to reduce limitations of unbalanced data sets confirms the results previously obtained. Table 3 presents the results of random undersampling, where observations from the dominant class were removed to balance the data set. Our findings confirm the stability and Figure 3. AUC results: random forest outperforms the other classifiers after the application of SMOTE Figure 4. AUC results: random forest outperforms the other classifiers after the application of random Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

robustness of our research design; aligning with trends observed in the unbalanced data set. Notably, models trained on raw accounting data continue to offer higher performance than those based on financial ratios. Evaluating performance using AUC, F1-score, and accuracy, RF and GBT emerge as the top-performing algorithms. Their AUC values remain consistent across different data set variations, reinforcing their reliability. RF achieves an AUC of 0.99 when trained on raw data (0.94 with financial ratios), while GBT follows closely with 0.98 (0.93 with financial ratios). DT also demonstrate strong performance, with AUC increasing from 0.91(financial ratios) to 0.97 (raw data). A similar performance trend is observed in F1-score, further validating RF as the most effective bankruptcy prediction model. RF reaches a maximum F1-score of value of 0.98 when using the complete set of raw accounting variables, confirming its superior predictive power. While other models exhibit improvements with raw data, they remain less effective than RF and GBT, emphasizing the critical role of detailed accounting information in machine learning-based financial distress Similarly, as seen with the SMOTE-applied model, accuracy serves as a valuable metric for assessing model performance. Once again, RF delivers the highest accuracy, achieving 0.98 with raw data, 0.86 with financial ratios and 0.94 with raw data used to calculate the ratios. Out-of-sample validation is a crucial step in assessing a model’s ability to generalize to new information. This process helps detect overfitting, characterized by excellent training performance but poor results with real-world predictions. Out-of-sample technique allows us to detect such issues early on, enabling us to refine and improve the model accordingly. By splitting the data set into three independent subsets; a training set for model learning, a test set for evaluation and a validation set containing previously unseen observations; we ensure that performance metrics accurately reflect the model’s predictive capacities. The results confirm the strong performance of models when trained on raw accounting data. As show in Tables 4–6 RF Table 4. Out-of-sample validation Panel A – Unbalanced data set: financial ratios as input variables (15 features)- Out of sample validation Panel B – Unbalanced data set: raw data of financial ratios as input variables (45 features) – Out of sample Panel C Unbalanced data set: raw data as input variables (215 features) – Out of sample validation Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Table 5. Out-of-sample validation after SMOTE application Panel A – SMOTE oversampling: financial ratios as input variables (15 features) – Out of sample validation Panel B – SMOTE oversampling raw data of financial ratios as input variables (45 features) – Out of sample Panel C – SMOTE oversampling: raw data as input variables (215 features) – Out of sample Validation Table 6. Out-of-sample validation after random undersampling validation Panel A – Random undersampling: financial ratios as input variables (15 features) – Out of sample Panel B – Random undersampling: raw data of financial ratios as input variables (45 features) – Out of Panel C – Random undersampling: raw data as input variables (215 features) – Out of sample validation Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

and GBT consistently achieve AUC values above 0.90, reinforcing their predictive strength. Panel C of Table 4 further highlights the advantage of incorporating raw accounting data, leading to enhanced model accuracy. In addition, the application of resampling techniques maintains model stability as evidenced in Table 5 (SMOTE oversampling) and Table 6 (random To assess the potential influence of geographical factors, we tested RF on regional subsamples of Italian firms (see Appendix 4 for details). Given RF’s superior performance across all models, we focused exclusively on its results to evaluate its practical applicability. Table 7 presents findings from the unbalanced data set, confirming the consistency of RF’s performance across different regions. Following the methodology applied to the full sample, we first tested the model on the unbalanced sample (Table 7) and then evaluated its performance after applying SMOTE oversampling (Table 8) and undersampling (Table 9). In Table 7, Panel A reports results using financial ratios, while Panels B and C examine raw accounting data (used for ratios calculations) and full accounting data, respectively. Results are consistent with previous findings, demonstrating strong predictive performance. AUC and F1-score progressively improve as raw accounting data is incorporated, reinforcing its predictive value. Although resampling techniques slightly reduce absolute performance, RF maintains AUC values above 0.90, confirming its robustness. The results across Tables 8 and 9 further support RF’s reliability in various economic environments. This paper aims to contribute to the ongoing debate on the use of machine learning in accounting research by systematically testing RF and GBT with different set of accounting features. The testing phase began with income statement (IS) variables only, then including only variable derived from balance sheet (BS). Finally, Table 10 compares results when using raw accounting data by both IS and BS. Following the methodology applied in previous tests, we conducted analyses on the unbalanced data set (Panel A), then applied oversampling (Panel A) and undersampling (Panel C). Results confirm that model performance improves as more features are incorporated. 5.2.1 Synthetic minority over-sampling technique oversampling extension. To address class imbalance, we applied SMOTE and tested five models. Prior research highlights SMOTE’s benefits (Garcia, 2022), leading to the development of over 85 extensions (Fernandez et al., 2018). Beyond standard SMOTE, we experimented with three extension: ADASYN, which prioritizes harder-to-classify minority instances (He et al., 2008); Borderline-SMOTE, which focuses oversampling on instances near the decision boundary (Fernandez et al., 2018); and K-means SMOTE, which enhances representativeness by integrating K-means clustering with SMOTE. For robustness testing, we applied these SMOTE variants only to RF due to its superior performance. Table 11 shows that all SMOTE extensions, maintain high predictive accuracy (AUC = 0.99) consistent with baseline SMOTE. Table 12 confirms that out-of-sample validation remains stable (AUC = 0.98). 5.2.2 Out-of-time analysis and economic-cycle evaluation. To further validate our results, we conduct an out-of-time validation to assess the model’s external validity. We split the data set into two subsamples: a training data set which included observations from 2010 to 2015, and the out-of-time validation data set made of observations from 2016 and 2017. Using RF on an imbalanced data set we present the results in Table 13. As expected, performance slightly declines yet remains highly effective (AUC = 0.95). In addition, we asses temporal robustness by conducting two out-of-time tests aligned with major macroeconomic episodes to capture the effect of economic cycles. We focus on two episodes: Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Table 7. Results at regional level Panel A – financial ratios Panel B – raw data for financial ratios Panel C – full raw accounting data Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Panel A – financial ratios Panel B – raw data for financial ratios Panel C – full raw accounting data Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Table 9. Random undersampling Panel A – financial ratios Panel B – raw data for financial ratios Panel C – full raw accounting data Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

the global financial crisis (2008–2009) and the sovereign crisis and recovery (2011–2013). We create two specific sub-periods: the first spans 2005–2010 and the second 2011–2015. For the global financial crisis, models are trained on data through 2004 and then tested on data from 2005 to 2010. For the second period, we train models on data through 2010 and then test them on 2011–2015. Untabulated results are similar to those from the baseline analysis. 5.3 Variable importance analysis A common criticism of machine learning models, particularly neural networks, is their lack of interpretability, often referred to as the “black box” problem. However, techniques like RF and GBT allow for greater transparency by assessing relative variable importance (RVIs); a measure of how each input variable contributes to model prediction (Hastie et al., 2009; Table 10. Results using different accounting reports Panel A – Unbalanced data set Panel B – SMOTE oversampling Panel C – Random undersampling Table 11. SMOTE Extension results (testing) Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Table 12. SMOTE Extension results (out-of-sample validation) Table 13. Out-of-time validation Table 14. Relative variable importance of the random forest model using the financial ratios-based Equity/total debt t – 1 Cash/current liabilities t – 1 Tax and social security debts/total asset t – 3 Tax and social security debts/total asset t – 1 Cash/current liabilities t – 3 EBIT/interest expenses t – 1 Equity/total debts t – 2 Average payment time t – 1 EBIT/interest expenses t – 2 Equity/total debts t – 3 Table 15. Relative variable importance of the random forest model using the raw accounting data set Total short debts t – 1 Total equity t – 1 Total shareholders fund t – 1 Revenues from sales and services t – 1 Total financial charges t – 2 Due to suppliers t – 3 Profit (loss) t – 1 Total financial charges t – 3 Due to suppliers t – 1 Total financial charges t – 1 Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Jones, 2017). As it is a variable measure, a value of 100 to the variable with the highest contribution, while the remaining variables are adjusted in scale accordingly. To analyze interpretability, we computed RVI scores for RF using both financial ratios (Table 14) and raw accounting data (Table 15). Table 14 highlights debt ratio one year before bankruptcy as the strongest predictor (RVI = 100), followed by its values two and three years prior (RVI = 25.00 and RVI = 18.75, respectively). Additional higher liquidity (cash/current liabilities) correlates with a lower bankruptcy risk, aligning with prior research (Altman, 1968; Jabeur et al., 2021; Jones, 2017). The third most relevant variable is the ratio between tax liabilities and total assets, which makes a significant contribution to correct firm classification (RVI = 68.75 at t – 3 and 50.00 at t – 1). Table 15 which examines raw accounting data, supports these findings and prior literature (Altman, 1968; Jabeur et al., 2021; Jones, 2017). Capital structure indicators remain the strongest predictors. Total short-term debt in the year preceding bankruptcy is the strongest overall predictor in RF, followed by equity level in the same year. This paper evaluates the efficiency of five machine learning models, RF, GBT, DT, LR and SVM, in predicting bankruptcy using a large data set. By testing models on three sets of input variables (financial ratios, raw accounting data used for ratio computation and full financial statement data), we demonstrate that RF and GBT consistently outperform other models. The results confirming that incorporating raw accounting data enhances model accuracy, with AUC values reaches 0.99 when using the complete financial statement. Given the inherent class imbalance in bankruptcy data, we applied resampling techniques (SMOTE and undersampling) to validate model robustness. These approached mitigate bias toward the majority class, ensuring reliable classification of bankrupt firms. Our findings are aligned with prior literature (Barboza et al., 2017; Jones, 2017; Jones et al., 2015), confirming that ensemble models such as RF and GBT are highly effective for bankruptcy prediction. In addition, the analysis highlights that DT perform well (Carmona et al., 2019; Jones, 2017; Zie¸ba et al., 2016), while LR and SVM remain less efficient in comparison. Overall, using raw accounting data guarantees consistently better performance for all the methods applied, and the use of the entire financial statement is more effective than the use of financial indicators. This also makes it possible to exploit the ability of these tools to handle a high number of variable inputs. Interpreted through the resource-based view and the notion of organizational slack, these findings suggest that the most predictive signals are observable footprints of a firm’s resource base and the claims placed upon it. Liquidity items (cash, working capital) proxy redeployable buffers; leverage and interest burden capture constraint tightening; profitability reflects the capacity to generate rents that replenish slack. When slack is thin and claims intensify, managerial discretion to reallocate resources narrows, an RBV/slack mechanism our models may detect in the joint evolution of statement items. The superior performance of raw multiyear inputs over ratios is consistent with this lens: raw items preserve the magnitudes and paths of resource stocks and obligations that ratio transformations can compress or obscure. The results also align with organizational decline dynamics. As firms approach distress, retrenchment and centralization can slow capability renewal and investment, further eroding slack and amplifying the financial footprints our models exploit. Our interpretability analyses, RVIs, recurrently elevate capital structure, liquidity, coverage and profitability, which map directly to the RBV/slack constructs of resources, buffers and constraints. We emphasize that these are predictive associations: the models are built for early warning, not for identifying causal effects of managerial or policy interventions. Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

This paper offers interesting contributions to the literature showing that the use of raw financial data can improve performance of machine learning algorithms if compared with models using financial ratios as traditionally done in previous studies. This paper also contributes to the growing discussion on the role of machine learning in accounting science, a recent debate that mostly focused in accounting fraud detection (Bao et al., 2020; Bertomeu et al., 2021; Perols, 2011; Perols et al., 2017). This is the first attempt to understand how raw accounting data can enhance the performance of machine learning approach to predict bankruptcy. Our findings indicate that raw accounting data can significantly enhance bankruptcy prediction models, making them more effective than traditional financial ratios. This represents a notable shift in how financial data can be leveraged for predictive analytics in accounting and finance. Our model underwent a series of robustness checks to control for potential bias due the high unbalance of the original data set. This paper has applied different oversampling techniques (SMOTE and its extensions), and it contribute to the literature by adding knowledge about the effectiveness of SMOTE and some of its main extensions in case of strongly unbalanced data sets (Shen et al., 2021). In addition, previous studies that have tried to analyze performance of different extension of SMOTE were focused on US context (Garcia, 2022), with this study we enrich literature by shedding the lights on a different setting. This paper has implications for auditors, regulators, investors and the banking industry. Machine learning models appear in fact to be easy to manage and interpret and are thus of interest to practitioners. A complex phenomenon like bankruptcy can be more easily interpreted through machine learning models, especially when the most significant variables can be identified. An effective and clear bankruptcy prediction model is critical for many stakeholders, especially investors, banks, auditors and regulators. For banks and investors, predictive models enable better risk assessment and resource allocation, minimizing losses due to firm defaults. For auditors, these models enhance going concern assessment, allowing for early detection of financial distress and enabling auditors to provide more proactive recommendations to both management and authorities. The identification of the most important input variables also offers them the possibility to focus with more attention on those specific items. Notably, our results suggest that financial statements alone may be sufficient for bankruptcy prediction, eliminating the need to compute financial ratios separately. This could simplify data preparation and streamline risk assessment processes. This paper has also implication for academics as results suggest that using raw accounting data can be able to provide valuable insights for the use of machine learning in bankruptcy prediction. This evidence could be useful to explore this same approach to develop machine learning models using raw accounting data for other purposes. This study has limitations. First, its focus on Italina companies necessitates further research to determine the generalizability of these findings to other economic and legal contexts using larger data sets. Second, the reliance on raw accounting data, without theoretical underpinnings, warrants investigation into its contribution to binary classification. Future research could explore the inclusion of nonaccounting variables (e.g. governance, macroeconomic factors), different algorithms (including deep learning) and the development of a global, multicountry model. [1.] Consiglio Nazionale Dei Dottori Commercialisti e Degli Esperti Contabili, Crisi d’impresa: gli indici dell’allerta (20 ottobre 2019). [2.] The ROC curve requires probability estimates while the SVM provides the class labels directly Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Alaka, H.A., Oyedele, L.O., Owolabi, H.A., Kumar, V., Ajayi, S.O., Akinade, O.O. and Bilal, M. (2018), “Systematic review of bankruptcy prediction models: towards a framework for tool selection”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 94, pp. 164-184, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2017.10.040. Altman, E.I. (1968), “Financial ratios, discriminant analysis and the prediction of corporate bankruptcy”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 23 No. 4, pp. 589-609, doi: 10.2307/2978933. Altman, E.I. and Sabato, G. (2007), “Modelling credit risk for SMEs: evidence from the U.S. Market”, Abacus, Vol. 43 No. 3, pp. 332-357, doi: 10.1111/j.1467-6281.2007.00234.x. Ashraf, S. and Ahmed, T. (2020), “Machine learning shrewd approach for an imbalanced dataset conversion samples”, Journal of Engineering and Technology (JET), Vol. 11 No. 1 SE-Articles, Balcaen, S. and Ooghe, H. (2006), “35 Years of studies on business failure: an overview of the classic statistical methodologies and their related problems”, The British Accounting Review, Vol. 38 No. 1, pp. 63-93, doi: 10.1016/j.bar.2005.09.001. Bao, Y., Ke, B., Li, B., Yu, Y.J. and Zhang, J. (2020), “Detecting accounting fraud in publicly traded U. S. Firms using a machine learning approach”, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 58 No. 1, pp. 199-235, doi: 10.1111/1475-679X.12292. Barboza, F., Kimura, H. and Altman, E. (2017), “Machine learning models and bankruptcy prediction”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 83, pp. 405-417, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2017.04.006. Barney, J. (1991), “Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage”, Journal of Management, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 99-120, doi: 10.1177/014920639101700108. Beaver, W. (1966), “Financial ratios As predictors of failure”, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 4 No. 1966, pp. 71-111, doi: 10.2307/2490171. Beaver, W., McNichols, M. and Rhie, J.W. (2005), “Have financial statements become less informative? Evidence from the ability of financial ratios to predict bankruptcy”, Review of Accounting Studies, Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 93-122, doi: 10.1007/s11142-004-6341-9. Becchetti, L. and Sierra, J. (2003), “Bankruptcy risk and productive efficiency in manufacturing firms”, Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 27 No. 11, pp. 2099-2120, doi: 10.1016/S0378-4266(02) Belavagi, M.C. and Muniyal, B. (2016), “Performance evaluation of supervised machine learning algorithms for intrusion detection”, Procedia Computer Science, Vol. 89, pp. 117-123, doi: 10. Bertomeu, J. (2020), “Machine learning improves accounting: Discussion, implementation and research opportunities”, Review of Accounting Studies, Vol. 25 No. 3, pp. 1135-1155, doi: 10.1007/ Bertomeu, J., Cheynel, E., Floyd, E. and Pan, W. (2021), “Using machine learning to detect misstatements”, Review of Accounting Studies, Vol. 26 No. 2, pp. 468-519, doi: 10.1007/s11142- Booth, A., Gerding, E. and Mcgroarty, F. (2014), Expert Systems with Applications and Seasonality. Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 41 No. 8, pp. 3651-3661, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2013.12. Bottazzi, G., Grazzi, M., Secchi, A. and Tamagni, F. (2011), “Financial and economic determinants of firm default”, Journal of Evolutionary Economics, Vol. 21 No. 3, pp. 373-406, doi: 10.1007/ Bourgeois, L.J. (1981), “On the measurement of organizational slack”, The Academy of Management Review, Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 29-39, doi: 10.2307/257138. Bradley, A.E. (1997), “The use of the area under the ROC curve in the evaluation of machine learning algorithms”, Pattern Recognition, Vol. 30 No. 7, pp. 1145-1159, doi: 10.1016/S0031-3203(96) Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Breiman, L. (1996), “Bagging predictors”, Machine Learning, Vol. 24 No. 2, pp. 123-140, doi: 10.3390/ Breiman, L. (2001), “Random forests”, Machine Learning, Vol. 45 No. 1, pp. 5-32, doi: 10.1023/A: Campbell, J.Y., Hilscher, J. and Szilagyi, J. (2008), “In search of distress risk”, The Journal of Finance, Vol. 63 No. 6, pp. 2899-2939, doi: 10.1111/j.1540-6261.2008.01416.x. Carmona, P., Climent, F. and Momparler, A. (2019), “Predicting failure in the U.S. banking sector: an extreme gradient boosting approach”, International Review of Economics and Finance, Vol. 61, pp. 304-323, doi: 10.1016/j.iref.2018.03.008. Charitou, A., Neophytou, E. and Charalambous, C. (2004), “Predicting corporate failure: empirical evidence for the UK”, European Accounting Review, Vol. 13 No. 3, pp. 465-497, doi: 10.1080/ Chawla, N., Bowyer, K.W., Hall, L.O. and Kegelmeyer, W.P. (2002), “SMOTE: synthetic minority over-sampling technique”, Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, Vol. 16, pp. 321-357, Chen, M.Y. (2011), “Bankruptcy prediction in firms with statistical and intelligent techniques and a comparison of evolutionary computation approaches”, Computers and Mathematics with Applications, Vol. 62 No. 12, pp. 4514-4524, doi: 10.1016/j.camwa.2011.10.030. Chen, N., Ribeiro, B. and Chen, A. (2016), “Financial credit risk assessment: a recent review”, Artificial Intelligence Review, Vol. 45 No. 1, pp. 1-23, doi: 10.1007/s10462-015-9434-x. Chou, C.H., Hsieh, S.C. and Qiu, C.J. (2017), “Hybrid genetic algorithm and fuzzy clustering for bankruptcy prediction”, Applied Soft Computing, Vol. 56, pp. 298-316, doi: 10.1016/j.asoc.2017. Climent, F., Momparler, A. and Carmona, P. (2019), “Anticipating bank distress in the eurozone: an extreme gradient boosting approach”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 101, pp. 885-896, Consiglio Nazionale dei Dottori Commercialisti e degli Esperti Contabili (2019), “Crisi d’Impresa”, Gli Indici Di Allerta. Cortes, C. and Vapnik, V. (1995), “Support-Vector networks”, Machine Learning, Vol. 20 No. 3, pp. 273-297, doi: 10.1007/BF00994018. Daily, C.M. and Dalton, D.R. (1994), “Bankruptcy and corporate governance: the impact of board composition and structure”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 37 No. 6, pp. 1603-1617, Darrat, A.F., Gray, S., Park, J.C. and Wu, Y. (2016), “Corporate governance and bankruptcy risk”, Journal of Accounting, Auditing and Finance, Vol. 31 No. 2, pp. 163-202, doi: 10.1177/ Deakin, E.B. (1972), “A discriminant analysis of predictors of business failure”, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 10 No. 1, p. 167, doi: 10.2307/2490225. Desai, V., Bucaro, A.C., Kim, J.W., Srivastava, R. and Desai, R. (2023), “Toward a better expert system for auditor going concern opinions using bayesian network inflation factors”, International Journal of Accounting Information Systems, Vol. 49, p. 100617, doi: 10.1016/j.accinf.2023. Du Jardin, P. (2010), “Predicting bankruptcy using neural networks and other classification methods: the influence of variable selection techniques on model accuracy”, Neurocomputing, Vol. 73 Nos 10-12, pp. 2047-2060, doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2009.11.034. Du Jardin, P. (2017), “Dynamics of firm financial evolution and bankruptcy prediction”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 75, pp. 25-43, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2017.01.016. Du Jardin, P. (2018), “Failure pattern-based ensembles applied to bankruptcy forecasting”, Decision Support Systems, Vol. 107, pp. 64-77, doi: 10.1016/j.dss.2018.01.003. Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Du Jardin, P. and Séverin, E. (2011), “Predicting corporate bankruptcy using a self-organizing map: an empirical study to improve the forecasting horizon of a financial failure model”, Decision Support Systems, Vol. 51 No. 3, pp. 701-711, doi: 10.1016/j.dss.2011.04.001. Edmister, R.O. (1972), “An empirical test of financial ratio analysis for small business failure prediction”, The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 7 No. 2, pp. 1477-1493, doi: 10.2307/2329929. Faris, H., Abukhurma, R., Almanaseer, W., Saadeh, M., Mora, A.M., Castillo, P.A. and Aljarah, I. (2020), “Improving financial bankruptcy prediction in a highly imbalanced class distribution using oversampling and ensemble learning: a case from the spanish market”, Progress in Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 31-53, doi: 10.1007/s13748-019-00197-9. Fedorova, E., Gilenko, E. and Dovzhenko, S. (2013), “Bankruptcy prediction for russian companies: application of combined classifiers”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 40 No. 18, pp. 7285-7293, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2013.07.032. Fernandez, A., Garcia, S., Herrera, F. and Chawla, N.V. (2018), “SMOTE for learning from imbalanced data: progress and challenges, marking the 15-year anniversary”, Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, Vol. 61, pp. 863-905, doi: 10.1613/jair.1.11192. Fitzpatrick, T. and Mues, C. (2016), “An empirical comparison of classification algorithms for mortgage default prediction: evidence from a distressed mortgage market”, European Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 249 No. 2, pp. 427-439, doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2015.09.014. Friedman, J.H. (2001), “Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting machine author”, The Annals of Statistics, Vol. 29 No. 5, pp. 1189-1232, doi: 10.1214/aos/1013203451. Friedman, J.H. (2002), “Stochastic gradient boosting”, Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, Vol. 38 No. 4, pp. 367-378, doi: 10.1016/S0167-9473(01)00065-2. Garcia, J. (2022), “Bankruptcy prediction using synthetic sampling”, Machine Learning with Applications, Vol. 9, p. 100343, doi: 10.1016/j.mlwa.2022.100343, Gepp, A. and Kumar, K. (2015), “Predicting financial distress: a comparison of survival analysis and decision tree techniques”, Procedia Computer Science, Vol. 54, pp. 396-404, doi: 10.1016/j. Gloubos, G. and Grammatikos, T. (1988), “The success of bankruptcy prediction models in Greece”, Studies in Banking and Finance, Vol. 7, pp. 37-46. Gogas, P., Papadimitriou, T. and Agrapetidou, A. (2018), “Forecasting bank failures and stress testing: a machine learning approach”, International Journal of Forecasting, Vol. 34 No. 3, pp. 440-455, Gong, M., Bai, Y., Qin, J., Wang, J., Yang, P. and Wang, S. (2020), “Gradient boosting machine for predicting return temperature of district heating system: a case study for residential buildings in Tianjin”, Journal of Building Engineering, Vol. 27, p. 100950, doi: 10.1016/j.jobe.2019.100950. Habib, A., Costa, M.D., Huang, H.J., Bhuiyan, M.B.U. and Sun, L. (2020), “Determinants and consequences of financial distress: Review of the empirical literature”, Accounting and Finance, Vol. 60 No. S1, pp. 1023-1075, doi: 10.1111/acfi.12400. Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Friedman, J.H. and Friedman, J.H. (2009), The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction, Springer. Hazami-Ammar, S. (2024), “Related party transactions and financial distress: Role of governance and audit attributes”, Journal of Accounting and Organizational Change, doi: 10.1108/JAOC-03- He, H., Bai, Y., Garcia, E.A. and Li, S. (2008), “ADASYN: Adaptive synthetic sampling approach for imbalanced learning”, 2008 IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence), Hong Kong, 2008, pp. 1322-1328, 10.1109/ Heo, J. and Yang, J.Y. (2014), “AdaBoost based bankruptcy forecasting of korean construction companies”, Applied Soft Computing, Vol. 24, pp. 494-499, doi: 10.1016/j.asoc.2014.08.009. Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Hillegeist, S.A., Keating, E.K., Cram, D.P. and Lundstedt, K.G. (2004), “Assessing the probability of bankruptcy”, Review of Accounting Studies, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 5-34, doi: 10.1023/B:RAST. Hosaka, T. (2019), “Bankruptcy prediction using imaged financial ratios and convolutional neural networks”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 117, pp. 287-299, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2018.09.039. Hua, Z., Wang, Y., Xu, X., Zhang, B. and Liang, L. (2007), “Predicting corporate financial distress based on integration of support vector machine and logistic regression”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 33 No. 2, pp. 434-440, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2006.05.006. Jabeur, S.B., Gharib, C., Mefteh-Wali, S. and Arfi, W.B. (2021), “CatBoost model and artificial intelligence techniques for corporate failure prediction”, Technological Forecasting and Social Change, Vol. 166 No. January, doi: 10.1016/j.techfore.2021.120658. Jackson, R.H.G. and Wood, A. (2013), “The performance of insolvency prediction and credit risk models in the UK: a comparative study”, The British Accounting Review, Vol. 45 No. 3, pp. 183-202, Jadhav, S., He, H. and Jenkins, K. (2018), “Information gain directed genetic algorithm wrapper feature selection for credit rating”, Applied Soft Computing, Vol. 69, pp. 541-553, doi: 10.1016/j.asoc. Jones, S. (2017), “Corporate bankruptcy prediction: a high dimensional analysis”, Review of Accounting Studies, Vol. 22 No. 3, pp. 1366-1422, doi: 10.1007/s11142-017-9407-1. Jones, S. and Hensher, D.A. (2007), “Modelling corporate failure: a multinomial nested logit analysis for unordered outcomes”, The British Accounting Review, Vol. 39 No. 1, pp. 89-107, doi: 10. Jones, S., Johnstone, D. and Wilson, R. (2015), “An empirical evaluation of the performance of binary classifiers in the prediction of credit ratings changes”, Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 56, pp. 72-85, doi: 10.1016/j.jbankfin.2015.02.006. Joshi, S., Ramesh, R. and Tahsildar, S. (2019), “A bankruptcy prediction model using random Forest”, Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Control Systems, ICICCS 2018, Iciccs, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/ICCONS.2018.8663128. Keasey, K., McGuinness, P. and Short, H. (1990), “The failure of UK industrial firms for the period 1976–1984, logistic analysis and entropy measures”, Omega, Vol. 18 No. 1, pp. 85-94, doi: 10. Kim, H.J., Jo, N.O. and Shin, K.S. (2016), “Optimization of cluster-based evolutionary undersampling for the artificial neural networks in corporate bankruptcy prediction”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 59, pp. 226-234, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2016.04.027. Kim, M. and Kang, D.K. (2010), “Ensemble with neural networks for bankruptcy prediction”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 37 No. 4, pp. 3373-3379, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2009.10.012. Kwak, W., Shi, Y. and Kou, G. (2012), “Bankruptcy prediction for korean firms after the 1997 financial crisis: Using a multiple criteria linear programming data mining approach”, Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting, Vol. 38 No. 4, pp. 441-453, doi: 10.1007/s11156-011- Landry, M., Erlinger, T.P., Patschke, D. and Varrichio, C. (2016), “Probabilistic gradient boosting machines for GEFCom2014 wind forecasting”, International Journal of Forecasting, Vol. 32 No. 3, pp. 1061-1066, doi: 10.1016/j.ijforecast.2016.02.002. Lee, K., Booth, D. and Alam, P. (2005), “A comparison of supervised and unsupervised neural networks in predicting bankruptcy of korean firms”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 29 No. 1, pp. 1-16, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2005.01.004. Lee, S. and Choi, W.S. (2013), “A multi-industry bankruptcy prediction model using back-propagation neural network and multivariate discriminant analysis”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 40 No. 8, pp. 2941-2946, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2012.12.009. Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Liang, D., Lu, C.C., Tsai, C.F. and Shih, G.A. (2016), “Financial ratios and corporate governance indicators in bankruptcy prediction: a comprehensive study”, European Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 252 No. 2, pp. 561-572, doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2016.01.012. Liang, D., Tsai, C.F., Lu, H.Y.R. and Chang, L.S. (2020), “Combining corporate governance indicators with stacking ensembles for financial distress prediction”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 120, pp. 137-146, doi: 10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.07.052. Liang, D., Tsai, C.F. and Wu, H.T. (2015), “The effect of feature selection on financial distress prediction”, Knowledge-Based Systems, Vol. 73 No. 1, pp. 289-297, doi: 10.1016/j.knosys.2014. Lin, W., Lu, Y.H. and Tsai, C.F. (2019), “Feature selection in single and ensemble learning-based bankruptcy prediction models”, Expert Systems, Vol. 36 No. 1, pp. 1-8, doi: 10.1111/exsy.12335. Lin, W.Y., Hu, Y.H. and Tsai, C.F. (2012), “Machine learning in financial crisis prediction: a survey”, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics Part C: Applications and Reviews, Vol. 42 No. 4, pp. 421-436, doi: 10.1109/TSMCC.2011.2170420. Lin, W.-C., Tsai, C.-F., Hu, Y.-H. and Jhang, J.-S. (2017), “Clustering-based undersampling in class- imbalanced data”, Information Sciences, Vols 409-410, pp. 17-26, doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2017.05. López Iturriaga, F.J. and Sanz, I.P. (2015), “Bankruptcy visualization and prediction using neural networks: a study of U.S. commercial banks”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 42 No. 6, pp. 2857-2869, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2014.11.025. Mai, F., Tian, S., Lee, C. and Ma, L. (2019), “Deep learning models for bankruptcy prediction using textual disclosures”, European Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 274 No. 2, pp. 743-758, Maione, C., De Paula, E.S., Gallimberti, M., Batista, B.L., Campiglia, A.D., Barbosa, F. and Barbosa, R.M. (2016), “Comparative study of data mining techniques for the authentication of organic grape juice based on ICP-MS analysis”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 49, pp. 60-73, Moll, J. and Yigitbasioglu, O. (2019), “The role of internet-related technologies in shaping the work of accountants: New directions for accounting research”, The British Accounting Review, Vol. 51 No. 6, doi: 10.1016/j.bar.2019.04.002. Mossman, C.E., Bell, G.G., Swartz, L.M. and Turtle, H. (1998), “An empirical comparison of bankruptcy models”, Financial Review, Vol. 33 No. 2, pp. 35-54, doi: 10.1111/j.1540-6288.1998. Mueller, S. and Stegmaier, J. (2015), “Economic failure and the role of plant age and size”, Small Business Economics, Vol. 44 No. 3, pp. 621-638, doi: 10.1007/s11187-014-9616-y. Neves, J.C. and Vieira, A. (2006), “Improving bankruptcy prediction with hidden layer learning vector quantization”, European Accounting Review, Vol. 15 No. 2, pp. 253-271, doi: 10.1080/ Ohlson, J.A. (1980), “Financial ratios and the probabilistic prediction of bankruptcy”, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 18 No. 1, p. 109, doi: 10.2307/2490395. Olson, D.L., Delen, D. and Meng, Y. (2012), “Comparative analysis of data mining methods for bankruptcy prediction”, Decision Support Systems, Vol. 52 No. 2, pp. 464-473, doi: 10.1016/j. Oreski, S. and Oreski, G. (2014), “Genetic algorithm-based heuristic for feature selection in credit risk assessment”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 41 No. 4, pp. 2052-2064, doi: 10.1016/j. Perols, J. (2011), “Financial statement fraud detection: an analysis of statistical and machine learning algorithms”, AUDITING: A Journal of Practice and Theory, Vol. 30 No. 2, pp. 19-50, Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Perols, J.L., Bowen, R.M., Zimmermann, C. and Samba, B. (2017), “Finding needles in a haystack: using data analytics to improve fraud prediction”, The Accounting Review, Vol. 92 No. 2, pp. 221-245, doi: 10.2308/accr-51562. Petropoulos, A., Siakoulis, V., Stavroulakis, E. and Vlachogiannakis, N.E. (2020), “Predicting bank insolvencies using machine learning techniques”, International Journal of Forecasting, Vol. 36 No. 3, pp. 1092-1113, doi: 10.1016/j.ijforecast.2019.11.005. Ranta, M., Ylinen, M. and Järvenpää, M. (2023), “Machine learning in management accounting research: literature review and pathways for the future”, European Accounting Review, Vol. 32 No. 3, pp. 607-636, doi: 10.1080/09638180.2022.2137221. Ravi Kumar, P. and Ravi, V. (2007), “Bankruptcy prediction in banks and firms via statistical and intelligent techniques—a review”, European Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 180 No. 1, pp. 1-28, doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2006.08.043. Ravisankar, P. and Ravi, V. (2010), “Financial distress prediction in banks using group method of data handling neural network, counter propagation neural network and fuzzy ARTMAP”, Knowledge-Based Systems, Vol. 23 No. 8, pp. 823-831, doi: 10.1016/j.knosys.2010.05.007. Rustam, Z. and Saragih, G.S. (2018), “Predicting bank financial failures using random Forest”, 2018 International Workshop on Big Data and Information Security, IWBIS, pp. 81-86. doi: 10.1109/ Safavian, S.R. and Landgrebe, D. (1991), “A survey of decision tree classifier methodology”, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Vol. 21 No. 3, pp. 660-674, doi: 10.1109/21. Schapire, R. (1990), “The strength of weak learnability”, Machine Learning, Vol. 5 No. 2, pp. 197-227, Schapire, R. and Freund, Y. (2012), Boosting: Foundations and Algorithms, MIT Press, doi: 10.7551/ Shen, F., Zhao, X., Kou, G. and Alsaadi, F.E. (2021), “A new deep learning ensemble credit risk evaluation model with an improved synthetic minority oversampling technique”, Applied Soft Computing, Vol. 98, p. 106852, doi: 10.1016/j.asoc.2020.106852. Shumway, T. (2001), “Forecasting bankruptcy more accurately: a simple hazard model”, The Journal of Business, Vol. 74 No. 1, pp. 101-124, doi: 10.1086/209665. Smiti, S. and Soui, M. (2020), “Bankruptcy prediction using deep learning approach based on borderline SMOTE”, Information Systems Frontiers, Vol. 22 No. 5, pp. 1067-1083, doi: 10.1007/ Son, H., Hyun, C., Phan, D. and Hwang, H.J. (2019), “Data analytic approach for bankruptcy prediction”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 138, p. 112816, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2019.07.033. Song, Y.G., Cao, Q. L. and Zhang, C. (2018), “Towards a new approach to predict business performance using machine learning”, Cognitive Systems Research, Vol. 52, pp. 1004-1012, doi: 10.1016/j. Staw, B.M., Sandelands, L.E. and Dutton, J.E. (1981), “Threat rigidity effects in organizational behavior: a multilevel analysis”, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 26 No. 4, pp. 501-524, Tang, X., Li, S., Tan, M. and Shi, W. (2020), “Incorporating textual and management factors into financial distress prediction: a comparative study of machine learning methods”, Journal of Forecasting, Vol. 39 No. 5, pp. 769-787, doi: 10.1002/for.2661. Tharwat, A. (2018), “Classification assessment methods”, Applied Computing and Informatics, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 168-192, doi: 10.1016/j.aci.2018.08.003. Tsai, C.F. (2020), “Two-stage hybrid learning techniques for bankruptcy prediction”, Statistical Analysis and Data Mining: The ASA Data Science Journal, Vol. 13 No. 6, pp. 565-572, doi: 10. Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Veganzones, D. and Séverin, E. (2018), “An investigation of bankruptcy prediction in imbalanced datasets”, Decision Support Systems, Vol. 112 No. May, pp. 111-124, doi: 10.1016/j.dss.2018.06. Wang, G., Ma, J., Huang, L. and Xu, K. (2012), “Two credit scoring models based on dual strategy ensemble trees”, Knowledge-Based Systems, Vol. 26, pp. 61-68, doi: 10.1016/j.knosys.2011.06. Wang, G., Ma, J. and Yang, S. (2014), “An improved boosting based on feature selection for corporate bankruptcy prediction”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 41 No. 5, pp. 2353-2361, doi: 10. Weitzel, W. and Jonsson, E. (1989), “Decline in organizations: a literature integration and extension”, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 34 No. 1, pp. 91-109, doi: 10.2307/2392987. Yeh, C., Chi, D. and Lin, Y. (2014), “Going-concern prediction using hybrid random forests and rough set approach”, Information Sciences, Vol. 254, pp. 98-110, doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2013.07.011. Zavgren, C.V. (1985), “Assessing the vulnerability to failure of American industrial firms: a logistic analysis”, Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. 19-45, doi: 10.1111/j. Zie¸ba, M., Tomczak, S.K. and Tomczak, J.M. (2016), “Ensemble boosted trees with synthetic features generation in application to bankruptcy prediction”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 58, pp. 93-101, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2016.04.001. Zmijewski, M.E. (1984), “Methodological issues related to the estimation of financial distress prediction models ”, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 22, pp. 59-82, doi: 10.2307/2490859. Wang, M., Chen, H., Li, H., Cai, Z., Zhao, X., Tong, C., Li, J. and Xu, X. (2017), “Grey wolf optimization evolving kernel extreme learning machine: application to bankruptcy prediction”, Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 63, pp. 54-68, doi: 10.1016/j.engappai. Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Set of financial ratios: Several indicators map to more than one economic construct (e.g. liquidity, leverage, coverage and efficiency). To avoid over-interpretation, we report for each ratio a primary domain (the construct most closely measured) and cross-links (other relevant domains). Labels are provided for exposition only; the predictive models use all features jointly and are not restricted by Table A1. Feature description Feature type (primary domain) Net financial position/total equity Tax and social security debts/total Total debt / (total debt + total Note(s): *Ebit = earnings before interest and taxes; Ebitda = earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization; average cashing time: accounts receivables *360 / net sales; average payment time: due to suppliers *360 / cost for purchase of goods and services Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Table A2. Descriptive statistics Descriptive statistics for financial ratios Average cashing time (days) Average payment time (days) 46.14 117.44 247.14 756 Net financial position/total equity Tax and social security debts/total assets Total debt/total debt + total equity (gearing) Descriptive statistics of main raw accounting data (financial data in thousand euros) Trade accounts - beyond 12 months Bonds beyond 12 months Due to shareholders for loans Due to sharesholders for loans - beyond 12 months Due to banks - beyond 12 months Due to other lenders Due to other lenders - beyond 12 Months Due to suppliers - beyond 12 months Tax payable beyond 12 months Due to social security institutions Due to social security institutions - beyond 12 months 3 Total depreciation, amortization and writedowns Provisions for risks and charges Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Table A3. The sample distribution based on the industrial sector Industry classification according to NACE one-digit code Manifacturing, mining and quarrying Wholesale and retail trade Accommodation and food service activities Financial and insurance activities Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Table A4. Comparative overview of classification methods single tree; slower with small trees to fit can overfit without early stopping; slower than RF Harder to tune; no native very large N; scaling Fits a logistic link Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

Table A5. List of Italian regions Gianluca Gabrielli can be contacted at: gianluca.gabrielli@unipr.it For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website: Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jaoc/article-pdf/22/7/31/11208206/jaoc-05-2025-0166en.pdf by guest on 18 February 2026

---NEW PAPER---

Digital Tulips? Returns to investors in initial coin offerings Hugo Benedetti, Leonard Kostovetsky Journal of Corporate Finance Please cite this article as: H. Benedetti and L. Kostovetsky, Digital Tulips? Returns to investors in initial coin offerings, Journal of Corporate Finance (2020), https://doi.org/ This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that, during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain. © 2020 Published by Elsevier.

Digital Tulips? Returns to Investors in Initial Hugo Benedettia hbenedetti.ese@uandes.cl, Leonard Kostovetskyb,* aESE Business School, Universidad de los Andes *Corresponding author at.: 780 Boylston St., Apt. 22C, Boston MA 02199, Phone Abstract: We analyze a dataset of 2,390 completed ICOs, which raised a total of $12 billion in capital, nearly all since January 2017. We find evidence of significant ICO underpricing, with average returns of 179% from the ICO price to the first day’s opening market price, over a holding period that averages just 16 days. After trading begins, tokens continue to appreciate in price, generating average buy-and-hold abnormal returns of 48% in the first 30 trading days. We also study the determinants of ICO underpricing and relate cryptocurrency prices to Twitter activity. JEL Codes: G14, G32, G38 Keywords: ICOs, cryptocurrencies, offerings, venture capital, underpricing

The traditional sources for seed and early-stage funding have recently been supplemented with crowdfunding: raising money from many small investors, in small amounts, over the Internet. Early on, crowdfunding was provided in exchange for future rewards or deals on products (e.g., Indiegogo, Kickstarter), and more recently for securities (equity crowdfunding). Advances in the blockchain technology have also led to a new hybrid form of crowdfunding: token offerings, also known as initial coin offerings (ICOs), which are the subject of this paper. Tokens are cryptocurrencies, digital currencies for which all records and transaction data are protected by cryptographic methods. Entrepreneurs issue branded tokens to raise capital to create an online platform or ecosystem, in which all transactions require the use of that native token. Since January 2017, over 1,000 startups successfully raised a total of about $12 billion using ICOs. Soon after the ICO, tokens are usually listed on one or more online exchanges, providing liquidity for token-holders and a signal of the quality and future prospects of the platform. The token markets are fairly liquid, with $3 million in average daily volume (for the average token) in the first thirty days of trading. The closest analogue to the ICO is the Initial Public Offering (IPO) of equity. In addition to selling a different asset, two key differences between ICOs and IPOs are: (1) ICO firms are much younger and smaller, typically in the earliest stage of a firm’s life cycle, and (2) ICO firms do not use an underwriter to help determine value and attract buyers. As a result, it is not clear how two well-known characteristics of the IPO market, underpricing (Beatty and Ritter, 1986) and post-IPO underperformance (Ritter, 1991) translate to ICOs

In this paper, we study the market for crypto-tokens, focusing on how entrepreneurs determine the price for tokens, the returns to investors from buying tokens during an ICO and selling them once they are listed on an exchange, and the returns to investors from investing in tokens on the listing date and holding them for various fixed time horizons. We also use data from Twitter accounts of cryptocurrency firms to investigate the relationship between Twitter followers and activity, and market prices, and to measure the attrition rate of crypto-companies after completion of the ICO. Our paper aims to provide a comprehensive analysis of how startups in this industry transition and perform from birth, through the offering, to the listing, and beyond. Consistent with the IPO literature, startups sell their tokens during the ICO at a significant discount to the opening market price, generating an average return for ICO investors of 179%, accrued over an average holding period of 16 days from the ICO end date to the listing date. Even after imputing large negative returns to tokens that are not listed within 60 days, the representative investor nearly doubles her money by investing in an ICO. Because some tokens are illiquid, we examine, and find our results are robust to, gradual liquidation of tokens after listing. ICO returns are positive and significant when the cryptocurrency asset class is performing well but also when it is performing poorly, indicating that the results are not purely an artifact of the strong overall performance in cryptocurrencies over the last few years. Still, our sample period largely overlaps with the hype period of cryptocurrencies so we are unable to say if our results also hold under more The average magnitude of the ICO underpricing in our sample is larger than for a typical IPO, but the ICO wave that we study more closely resembles earlier IPO “hot issue

markets” which exhibited sharp spikes in the number of offerings and more severe-than- usual underpricing (e.g., Ibbotson and Jaffe, 1975; Ritter, 1984; Helwege and Liang, 2004). Furthermore, the entrepreneurs’ lack of expertise in determining market demand for their tokens and the absence of experienced underwriters who could gather information about investor valuations (see Benveniste and Spindt, 1989) would also be expected to lead to more severe underpricing for ICOs than for IPOs. Finally, ICO investors are subject to high levels of uncertainty about the value of a startup company whose platform is typically still in the idea stage, and greater information asymmetry in offerings is associated with more We also examine the cross-sectional determinants of ICO underpricing and find that the returns to ICO investors have declined over time, suggesting that firms are learning from prior offerings about market demand for different kinds of platforms. Pre-sales, also called pre-ICOs, have gotten more popular over time and we find that they also act to reduce underpricing, likely by addressing informational frictions. We also find that the nominal ICO price, in dollars, is negatively correlated with underpricing and ICO returns, indicating a tendency of token prices to drift toward a “normal” nominal price when they are traded. While earlier research has shown that IPOs of younger firms are more underpriced than those of more mature firms (Loughran and Ritter, 2004), we do not find that the age of a firm, which we calculate using its Twitter account activation date, is significantly related to its ICO underpricing. This divergence could be due to our lack of precise data on age, or more likely, because the firms in our sample are so new, with a median age of only 3 months, that their age is largely uncorrelated with information

Next, we use Twitter data to gain a better understanding of the life cycle of ICO firms and the relationship between market values and Twitter activity. The coefficient from a simple regression of (the natural logarithm of) cryptocurrency market capitalization on (the natural logarithm of) the number of Twitter followers is 1.2 (with a standard error of 0.033). The fact that this coefficient is significantly greater than one is indicative of the positive network externalities that form when a platform reaches a critical mass of users. We use intensity of tweets from the cryptocurrency official Twitter account after the ICO to estimate that the survival rate for startups after 120 days (from the end of the ICO) is only 44.2%, assuming that all firms inactive on Twitter in the fifth month did not survive. Breaking it down by category, 83% of the 694 ICOs that don’t report capital and don’t list on an exchange are inactive after 120 days. For the 420 ICOs that raise some capital but don’t list, this figure falls to 52%, and for the 440 ICOs that list on an exchange, only 16% are inactive in the fifth month. We also show that in cryptocurrency markets, company announcements (as measured by Tweets) are good news, while no news is bad news. Daily market returns of tokens go up by about 0.3% for each Tweet that day and are also somewhat positively correlated with previous day’s Twitter intensity. On the other hand, returns are negatively correlated with Twitter intensity from the prior month, suggesting some overreaction to news announced on Twitter, leading to reversals. Finally, we calculate the average returns to investors from buying a token when it is listed and then holding it for different time horizons. Because of overall appreciation in cryptocurrencies, we adjust for asset class returns in three ways: by subtracting the return of Bitcoin (the most popular and actively traded cryptocurrency), by subtracting a value-

weighted return to an index of all tokens, and by subtracting the return to a matched (by market capitalization) cryptocurrency that has traded for at least one year. In contrast to IPOs, crypto-tokens continue to generate abnormal positive average returns after the ICO. The first day’s average abnormal returns range from 14% to 16%, 30- day average abnormal returns range from 41% to 67%, and 180-day average abnormal returns range from 150% to 430%. Thus, even after the positive and significant returns from ICO to listing, token prices continue to drift higher (relative to other cryptocurrencies) in the first six months after the listing date. Again, the ICO post-listing returns seems to be more akin to the “hot issue” IPO markets, which were defined by Ibbotson and Jaffe (1975) as periods in which “average first month performance (or aftermarket performance) of new issues is abnormally high.” (p.1) Our paper contributes to the large literature on the issuance of equity securities, specifically papers that study IPO cycles (e.g., Maksimovic and Pichler, 2001; Helwege and Liang, 2004; Ljungvist, Nanda, and Singh, 2006), the role of informational asymmetry and underwriters in IPO underpricing (Benveniste and Spindt, 1989; Habib and Ljunqvist, 2001; Loughran and Ritter, 2004; Hanley and Hoberg, 2010) and the role of venture capital (VC) backing in IPOs (Barry, Muscarella, Peavy and Vetsuypens, 1990; Brav and Gompers, 2004; Rossetto, 2008). While VC-backed IPOs are less underpriced and have better long- run performance, Boreiko and Sahdev (2018) noted that only 14.9% of ICOs in their sample had VC backing, so most ICOs look more similar to the IPOs that lack venture capital The literature on blockchains, cryptocurrencies, and ICOs has grown significantly in just the last year. A number of recent theory papers have focused on the value of this

hybrid asset, simultaneously an instrument used to raise capital, and a currency that will be used as a medium of exchange once the platform is built. Using a dynamic model, Cong, Li, and Wang (2018) derive the token price as a function of user population and preferences, and platform utility, and show that tokens lead to accelerated platform adoption as investors also become customers, and vice versa. Li and Mann (2018) and Sockin and Xiong (2018) focus on the advantages of tokens in coordinating platform adoption, and aggregating information about a platform’s fundamental value. ICOs could also be beneficial for the entrepreneur, in extracting information about how much value consumers derive from the platform (Catalini and Gans, 2018), and in transferring idiosyncratic venture risk without losing control rights (Chod and Lyandres, 2018). The empirical literature on cryptocurrencies has also developed, with a number of papers looking at the return structure of cryptocurrency markets (Stoffels, 2017; Krueckeberg and Scholz, 2019; Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu, 2019) and transaction costs (Easley, O’Hara, and Basu, 2019). Several studies have focused on ICOs, with a focus on determinants of ICO success (Adhami, Giudici, and Martinazzi, 2018; Amsden and Schweizer, 2018; Fisch, 2019; Howell, Niessner, and Yermack, 2019) and information asymmetry (Davydiuk, Gupta, and Rosen, 2019; Florysiak and Schandlbauer, 2019). Momtaz (2018a) focuses on listing day returns, while Momtaz (2018b) examines long-term returns to all cryptocurrencies, not just those that performed ICOs. Our paper instead focuses on returns to investing in a token from the ICO to the listing date and in the More broadly, our paper complements the growing literature on the value of blockchains as a development of Fintech. Yermack (2017) discusses the possible uses of

blockchain technology for corporate governance, while Cong and He (2019) analyze how they can improve contracting through the use of “smart” self-enforcing contracts. Catalini and Gans (2017) provide an overview of the disruptive potential of blockchain technology. Saleh (2017) studies the proof-of-stake mechanism as an alternative to the electricity- reliant proof-of-work currently used by most public blockchains. Harvey (2014) provides a primer on cryptocurrencies. Outside of cryptocurrencies, our paper is also related to the recent literature on crowdfunding design including Ellman and Hurkens (2015), Chang (2016), Chemla and Tinn (2019), and Strausz (2017). Our paper makes three main contributions. First, we merge multiple online databases with hand-collected data to give us an unbiased and comprehensive summary of ICO fundraising metrics, prices and returns, and social media activity. Therefore, our findings are less subject to critiques of survivorship, recency, and selection bias. Second, we show that ICO investors are receiving extraordinary compensation for providing capital to an unproven firm and product through unregulated means. On the one hand, this is consistent with the tight relationship between risk and return that we would expect in markets with rational agents. On the other hand, it flies in the face of many regulators and governments who view token sales as scams that take advantage of unsophisticated investors, and thus must be restricted to sophisticated investors or even banned. Finally, we provide calculations for ICO returns which are directly comparable (and contrastable) with those on IPOs, which can be helpful in better understanding the causes of the well-

Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 explains the institutional details of the ICO market. Section 3 introduces the data and methodology for this paper. Section 4 presents results on ICO returns. Section 5 focuses on ICO returns after listing. Section 6 concludes. 2. Background on initial coin offerings and cryptocurrencies Cryptocurrencies are digital currencies with all transactions kept on a public decentralized distributed ledger called the blockchain. They are typically created by a process called mining, in which computers run software that solves complicated math problems to verify transactions and are rewarded with new units of currency. For instance, on January 3, 2009, the first 50 Bitcoins were “mined” for the first (or genesis) block of the Bitcoin blockchain. From 2009 through 2013, a number of alternative cryptocurrencies, each with their own blockchain, were introduced with some unique features but generally the same functional form as Bitcoin. In 2013, J.R. Sweezy introduced MasterCoin (later rebranded as OMNI), a protocol built on top of Bitcoin. Unlike earlier cryptocurrencies, units of MasterCoin were created by a fundraiser in the month of August 2013, during which, interested parties could send Bitcoins to an account and receive MasterCoins back at a pre-established exchange rate. The fundraiser collected approximately $500,000 worth of Bitcoin which was to be used for development and payment of bounties for important tasks. Other cryptocurrencies started using the fundraiser model for the creation of cryptocurrencies, with Ethereum raising over $15 million in August 2014. In 2015, Ethereum’s introduction of a standard for implementing tokens (ERC20) further streamlined the ICO process. In 2015, there were 9 such offerings, 74 in 2016, and more than 1000 ICOs in 2017.

ICOs typically begin when the organization issuing the cryptocurrency publishes a White Paper, a prospectus which details the project’s goal, roadmap, team, and schedule for the offering. Interested buyers can then register for the offering and confirm their identities to avoid violations of Know Your Customer (KYC) and Anti-Money Laundering (AML) regulations, and local securities laws. ICOs are nowadays typically conducted in multiple stages, which can altogether last several months, with earlier investors getting better terms. Some stages can be restricted to preferred users, angel investors, venture capitalists, Because cryptocurrency accounts are anonymous1, transactions are irrevocable, and ICOs are unregulated, there is a high incidence of scams and theft. Some ICOs have been targeted by hackers, while many others were used to defraud investors. In response to these high-profile illegal activities, governments and regulators have tightened the vise on ICOs. China and South Korea banned them entirely in late 2017. In the United States, ICOs are currently in a state of legal limbo, with Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) officials testifying that they believe (almost) all tokens are securities and therefore need to be registered, but bringing enforcement actions only against schemes that are clearly fraudulent. The SEC even set up a website for a nonexistent coin called the Howey Coin (with a fake White Paper and fake Twitter accounts for celebrities who supposedly endorsed this coin), in order to educate investors about the risks associated with ICOs. In March 2018, the Praetorian Group became the first ICO to register with the SEC as a security offering. Other countries, including ICO safe havens like Switzerland and Singapore 1 Technically, cryptocurrencies are “pseudonymous”, which means the addresses are public and uniquely identifiable and traceable, but the accountholder’s identity is anonymous.

are also revising their regulations, making the regulatory climate for ICOs all around the 3. Data and methodology We merge data for three different components of our analysis: ICO characteristics, daily market data on cryptocurrencies, and social media announcements on Twitter. A large number of ICO aggregator websites (over 15 as of the writing of this paper) have been launched due to increased interest by potential investors and the general public. We collect data from five aggregator websites that, when combined, give us largest number of ICOs, the most available characteristics, and the highest accuracy: icodata.io (1731 observations), icobench.com (3073 observations), icorating.com (2312 observations), icodrops.com (457 observations), and ico-check.com (533 observations). In addition to gathering ICO characteristics, we also collect four identifiers to help match the datasets together: token/platform name, ticker symbol, website URL, and twitter handle. When we merge the datasets together, we are left with 4003 ICOs, including 2390 ICOs which were completed before April 30, 2018, and 1613 ICOs which are ongoing as of that date or planned for the future. We drop the latter from our sample and focus on the set of ICOs that One potential problem with our data collection process is that since the aggregator websites have not been around since the first ICO in 2013, they may be backfilling based on survivorship (or ICO success), creating a survivorship bias in our dataset of ICOs. Survivors are likely to be better performers which would bias upward the returns that we estimate. In order to mitigate this concern, we supplement the website aggregators data with hand-

collected data on ICOs that were completed before December 31, 2016. This data is manually collected using Google Searches with time ranges (using “ICO” and common synonyms) and announcements on bitcointalk.org. We find that 50% of the 96 hand- collected ICOs (from 2013 through 2016) are not found in any of the five data aggregators. However, the aggregators do much better with more recent ICOs, with 83% of ICOs from the 4th quarter of 2016 being covered by at least one of the data aggregators. We use coinmarketcap.com (CMC) for cryptocurrency market data. CMC is widely considered the best available data source for cryptocurrency volume and prices. It collects information daily from the most widely-used exchanges2 and posts opening, closing, high, and low prices, as well as volume and market capitalization (in dollars) for most included cryptocurrencies.3 It is a survivorship-bias-free dataset that currently includes data from approximately 1600 active and 1100 defunct cryptocurrencies. CMC does require organizations to submit a form in order to list their currencies so there is occasionally a small lag between the exchange listing date and the date when prices start appearing on Finally, for each Twitter account, we collect information from Twitter.com on the time/date and text of tweets, the time/date when the account was opened, and the number of followers (as of the collection date: May 8, 2018). Twitter only allows collection of the last 3200 tweets from each user, but only 2.6% of the twitter accounts in our sample have 2 On April 30, 2018, CMC provides Bitcoin prices from 88 different exchanges, and Ether prices from 91 3 Market capitalization does not necessarily capture the value of floated tokens as many are kept in reserve by the issuers for bounties, employee compensation, etc.

more than that number of tweets as of the collection date.4 We code the number of Tweets in a day as missing instead of zero, if there are 3200 more recent Tweets available. 3.1 Initial coin offerings (ICO) data Each of the five web aggregators have their own advantages and disadvantages. In order to figure out which source to use to resolve disagreement in variable values, we go to the source data (company ICO announcements) for a sample of such discrepancies. Based on this sampling, we determined the following: Icobench has the most observations but often provides inaccurate values for certain variables (also true for Icorating). Icodata has fewer observations and small number of characteristics but the data is highly accurate. Icodrops has the highest-quality data on ICO prices. Ico-check provides the full schedule of ICO prices (including all bonuses for investing early). Based on this analysis, our hierarchy of data sources is (1) ICOdata, (2) ICOdrops, (3) ICObench, (4) ICOrating, (5) Icocheck, except (1) and (2) are switched for price data. For any variable of interest, we use this hierarchy to determine which source to use across all datasets that provide that variable. We collect the following ICO variables: ICO start date, ICO end date, Capital raised, ICO price, Hardcap, Tokens % sold, Country of registration, and Pre-ICO (dummy variable). We use the ICO start and end dates to generate Length of ICO. We define Country Rule of law to be the home country’s World Bank Rule of Law rating5 (as of 2016, the most recent year available), and Country GDP per capita to be the home country’s 2016 World Bank 4 The post-listing abnormal returns of this group of ICOs is similar to those of the entire sample, so omitting them should not lead to a significant sample selection problem. 5 According to the World Bank, this rating “reflects perceptions of the extent to which agents have confidence in and abide by the rules of society, and in particular the quality of contract enforcement, property rights, the police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence.”

per-capita GDP (in US$). Twitter Age (months) is the number of months between the date when the Twitter account was opened and the ICO was started (or one plus months to ICO end date if ICO start date is missing). Pre-ICO Twitter intensity is the average daily number of tweets in the six months before the ICO started, and ICO Twitter intensity is the average daily number of tweets during the ICO. We report summary statistics for all ICO characteristics in Table 1. Panel A of Table 1 shows that 48% of the 2390 ICOs had non-zero and non-missing values for capital raised. The remaining 52% of ICOs likely fall into one of four categories: (1) They raise capital and use it to continue with the project, but don’t announce the amount raised, (2) They raise capital but don’t reach their “softcap”, the minimum required to go through with the project, so they refund the funds to investors, (3) They are scams used to steal the funds, (4) They are announced, along with start and end dates, but never actually take place. We can’t know for sure which category each ICO falls into, but in Section 4b, we will use their Twitter activity after the ICO to try to determine what fraction of these projects actually held an ICO and what fraction continued to be active after the completion of the ICO. Overall, only 26% of ICOs have listed their tokens on an exchange, with the important caveat that many ICOs have been completed recently and might be listed in the future. The average ICO raised $11.5 million, but the distribution is positively skewed due to a small number of “mega-ICOs”, so the median value raised is only $3.8 million. Panel B unsurprisingly shows that listed ICOs raise about three times as much, on average, compared to non-listed ICOs. Furthermore, the average capital raised by ICOs has gone up over time from $7.9 million (before July 2017) to $11 million (in the second half of 2017) to $14 million (in 2018). Most entrepreneurs choose a fairly low ICO price for their tokens,

with a median value of $0.30 making most of them akin to penny stocks, although several large outliers lead to a cross-sectional average ICO price of $11.20. Because the minimum tick size is tiny on most cryptocurrency exchanges, the nominal price of a token is unlikely to have major liquidity or microstructure effects on trading, but it could be important in attracting behavioral investors who are attracted to low nominal prices (Birru and Wang, 2016). Panel B suggests this might be the case, with a slightly lower median ICO price for ICOs that raised capital, and a much lower median ICO price for listed ICOs. The hardcap, the maximum amount of funds that the ICO is allowed to raise, is approximately $43 million for the average ICO (median value is $23 million), and the average percent of all tokens that are sold during the ICO is 60%. Panel B shows that these variables are generally not correlated with ICO success and have not changed much over time, except for a small increase in token percentage sold since the earliest ICOs. 40% of projects hold a pre-ICO, in which tokens are sold to preferred or accredited investors at substantial discounts, with the funds raised from the ICO used to pay for the costs associated with the ICO. Pre-ICOs do not seem to be correlated with success, but they have become more popular over time, with an average incidence of 1% for ICOs completed before July 1, 2017, 29% for the second half of 2017 ICOs, and 57% for 2018 ICOs. The average ICO lasts 37 days (with a median length of 31 days) although this figure has recently been rising with an average of 41 days for 2018 ICOs. The last set of variables is related to activity characteristics based on Twitter data. The average length of time from the date that the platform’s Twitter account is activated to the ICO start date is about 8 months, but the median value of this variable is only 3 months, so a large number open social media accounts just in time for their token sales. Accounts

with a longer record of activity are slightly more likely to be successful, with listed ICOs have an average Twitter age of 9.4 months (median of 4 months). Crypto-companies are not extremely active in tweeting, with the average firm putting out 2.1 tweets per day in the six months before the start of the ICO (median firm tweets 0.7 times per day). This only rises slightly to 2.7 tweets per day (once per day for the median) during the ICO. Panel B provides evidence that stronger activity before the ICO, and especially during the ICO, is correlated with success. However, increased tweeting during the ICO could be a result of ICO success rather than its cause, as entrepreneurs are more likely to share good news about strong token sales. Indeed, results in section 4b from regressions of daily returns on daily Twitter activity indicate that “good news generates more Tweets” is the correct direction of causality. In addition to Twitter, ICO platforms typically use other social media sites including Bitcointalk, Facebook, Telegram, Slack, Medium, Reddit, et al., so we are only capturing a portion, although hopefully a representative portion, of their social media and marketing footprint. Several of the ICO aggregator websites report a home country for each ICO. Figure 1 shows the distribution of ICOs by country, with darker colors indicating a greater number of ICOs. Appendix Table A1 lists the total number of ICOs and total capital raised, by home country. Although we collect and report statistics related to this variable (based on the home country reported by our data sources), we note that since these are token sales for decentralized digital platforms, they don’t really have a single home country. Although Satoshi Nakamoto is supposed to be an alias for someone from Japan, no one would call Bitcoin a Japanese coin. In fact, the team of entrepreneurs and employees are often from many different countries, and the country of registration or incorporation is usually chosen

for legal and tax reasons, which is why noted havens like British Overseas Territories, Singapore, Switzerland, Cyprus, and the Baltic States, especially Estonia, are overrepresented. The largest English-speaking countries and Russia are also popular locations for ICOs, consistent with prior research on the geographic distribution and determinants of ICOs (Huang, Meoli, and Vismara, 2019). Table 1 indicates that ICOs are mostly located in countries with above-average World Bank Rule of Law rankings and high standards of living, two metrics which are highly correlated with each other. These two measures are also positively associated with ICO success, with listed ICOs originating from countries that are 0.2 points higher in their Rule of Law rating and have about $4,000 more in GDP per capita, relative to the entire Panel C of Table 1 shows the distribution of ICOs and average values of ICO characteristics by geographical region. Asia, Europe, and North America are the three biggest centers of ICOs, both by number of events and capital raised. Most other ICO variables look similar across region, except for the nominal ICO price (in dollars per token), which varies widely across region. While we convert ICO prices into dollars, the original ICO price (usually denominated in Ether or Bitcoin) might be chosen based on its value in the home currency of the crypto-company and/or most potential investors, which would vary across region. This suggests that ICO investors care about the nominal price per token, additional evidence of which we discuss later in the paper. Figure 2 shows the distribution of ICOs over time (from February 2016 through April 2018) and how much each firm raised in capital. The ICO wave really started to build in March 2017, with significant growth in the number per month and how much capital

they were raising. Listing of tokens is depicted by the shape and color of each dot. Most of the ICOs that have not listed (shown with a red x) either didn’t raise a lot of capital or happened only recently so they are likely to list in the future. Blue diamonds indicate tokens that listed but only after 60 days had passed from the end of the ICO. Since we don’t know which tokens will list in the future, we do not have the full set of such “lagged” listed tokens. Therefore, to ensure that our sample is not biased, we generally exclude them, along with all ICOs that happened in the last 60 days, from our performance tests. 3.2 Market prices of cryptocurrencies data We merge the ICO data from the previous section with daily market data on price, volume, and market capitalization from CMC, using the same four identifiers: token/platform name, ticker symbol, website URL, and twitter handle. We find matches for 627 of the 2390 ICO in the CMC database. Of those 627, 18 were listed before the start of the ICO (either due to a pre-ICO, an earlier offering, or a conversion) which we drop from our sample, leaving us with 609 listed ICOs. We report summary statistics for these 609 tokens in Table 2. The average time between the end of the ICO and the first day of trading is 31 days, with a median time of 16 days. 44 were listed prior to the end of the ICO. The average ICO price for this sample is $22.70 (median is $0.14), while the average opening price is $25.90 (median is $0.19) suggesting a positive drift in price between the end of the ICO and listing dates. Calculating a rate of return for the sample where ICO price and opening (and closing) market prices are available yields an average rate of return of 246% (median rate of return of 21%) to first open and 273% (median rate of return of 29%) to first close. It’s important to

highlight that this is an average return for ICOs that go on to be listed and therefore is not something that can be predicted at the time of the ICO and earned by an investor. First day’s market capitalization averages $54.7 million, which is significantly higher than the $17.2 million average capital raised. Some of this discrepancy is due to a fraction of tokens held by insiders and not sold in the offering, but most comes from the appreciation in price. Finally, we calculate the average daily volume in the first month of trading to see how liquid these tokens are for investors who bought them in the ICO and want to potentially liquidate them at a profit. The cross-sectional average value for first month volume is $2.5 million (per day), but the distribution is highly skewed with a cross- sectional median value of $140,000. A fairly large proportion of currencies are illiquid, with the 10th percentile having an average daily volume of $5000 in the first month. In the next section of the paper, we investigate, in greater detail, the performance and feasibility of a trading strategy of buying cryptotokens at the ICO price and selling them when they are listed on an exchange. 4. Returns to ICO investors Our first set of tests examine the returns to token buyers from investing through ICOs. Our main variable of interest, ICO->first open ROR, is the rate of return from the price that the investor paid during the offering until the first available (opening) price on CMC. One concern with using this measure is that it is available only for the subset of ICOs which go on to list their tokens on an exchange, approximately 25% of the sample. Investors that buy tokens from the other 75% of ICOs own an illiquid and useless asset, at least until such

time as the platform is built and the token can be exchanged for services on the platform. However, there are two points that mitigate this concern: (1) most of the unlisted ICOs raise less than their “softcap” so they refund the raised capital to investors, and (2) more than 80% of the total capital invested in ICOs is invested in tokens that go on to list, so the tokens with available market price data are the ones that actually matter to the typical A second concern is that we don’t now know all the past ICOs that list because they might still list in the future. While the median time between the end of the ICO and listing is only 16 days, a few ICOs don’t list their tokens for many months or even years. In order to avoid any selection bias in our sample based on time-to-listing, we restrict our analysis to ICOs that were completed by March 1, 2018, and that listed in less than 60 days, since we currently know all the ICOs that satisfy these criteria. We start with a graphical representation of ICO underpricing, scatter plotting returns against ICO end date on Figure 3 for all the ICOs in our (restricted) sample. Table 2 indicates that the returns variable has a high positive skewness due to several large outliers, so to make it easier to graph, we first perform a log-transformation and then plot the natural logarithm of one plus ICO->first open ROR against date. All price calculations for this figure are denominated in Bitcoin which should remove any changes in value arising from the volatile fluctuations in the exchange rate between the cryptocurrency asset class and fiat currencies. Figure 3 illustrates that most tokens were sold below their market price, but also, that many tokens were overpriced, and declined in value. The red-dashed line, which is the best fit line, is above the x-axis for the entire sample period, indicating that the average

(log) return is positive, but it has a negative slope, suggesting that underpricing of tokens has declined over time (i.e., returns to ICO investors have been declining). We investigate this decline over time in the context of a multivariable regression, and present the results in Table 5, later in this section. Table 3 shows the average returns to investing in an ICO. The first two rows are equal-weighted averages of all observations, with the prices denominated in dollars for the first row set of results and in Bitcoin for the second row set of results. Equal-weighted returns are the returns to a naïve investor, who puts the same amount of money in each ICO, not accounting for their merits. The last two rows are value-weighted returns, weighted by the amount of capital raised by each ICO. These are the returns to a sophisticated investor who, like the aggregate set of investors, realizes ex-ante that some projects have relatively less merit and are under-weighted in her portfolio, while others, with more potential, are over-weighted. This is also the return to a randomly-chosen dollar invested in ICOs, or, if each investor’s ICO purchases were identical (say $1000), the return to a randomly chosen investor. In our opinion, the value-weighted returns are more informative and interesting in understanding the ICO market, but we report both sets of results for comparison in Table 3. We start by calculating returns to investors in 416 ICOs that went on to list, in less than 60 days, and report the results in Column (1) of Table 3. The average of equal- weighted returns to investing in listed ICOs is a statistically significant 179% (167% in Bitcoin), with a very similar 173% (162% in Bitcoin) value-weighted average. From the sellers’ point of view, crypto-companies are, on average, issuing tokens for less than half of their true market value, leaving significant money on the table.

For Columns (2) and (3), we also include (in addition to the 416 listed ICOs) another 471 ICOs that reported raising capital but did not list within 60 days. Since there are no available market values for these tokens in the aftermath of the ICO, we impute returns under two different scenarios. In Column (2), the average imputed return to unlisted tokens is -50%. Unlisted tokens investments are not a total loss if the raised capital is refunded due to inadequate funds, if there is an over-the-counter market for them, or if the tokens are listed on an exchange which is not included in CMC. With imputed returns of -50% to unlisted ICOs, average ICO returns are unsurprisingly lower than in Column (1), 57% (52% in Bitcoin) for equal-weighted averages and 105% (98% in Bitcoin) for value- weighted averages, but still positive and statistically significant. In Column (3), we look at worst-case scenario, imputing -100% to all ICOs that raised capital but did not list within 60 days. Under this scenario, the equal-weighted average returns are 31% (26% in Bitcoin) and are no longer significant at the 5% level, but the value-weighted returns remain larger in magnitude and significant at 90% (82% in Bitcoin). The main reason for the divergence between equal and value weighting is the high correlation between raised capital and listing probability (which was illustrated in Figure 2) so most of the ICOs that don’t list raised little capital and value-weighting minimizes the impact of their -100% return. For Columns (4) and (5), we include an additional 732 ICOs that neither reported raising capital nor were listed within 60 days. Again, we calculate and report average equal-weighted investor returns after imputing -50% (in Column (4)) and -100% (in Column (5)) returns to unlisted ICOs. Since these ICOs raised little or no capital, they do not change the value-weighted returns we calculated and displayed in the last two rows of Columns (2) and (3). When including these ICOs, equal-weighted returns are reduced to

9% (6% in Bitcoin) with a -50% imputed return, and -28% (-31% in Bitcoin) with an imputed return of -100%. These are the returns to a naïve investor who invests across all ICOs, even those that didn’t report raising capital, and they provide a lower bound to naïve investor returns. However, they are not at all a realistic estimate of returns, even for naïve investors, because many of the ICOs that don’t report raising capital (and many of those that report raising capital but do not list) either refunded the capital they raised because of inadequate funds or they planned an ICO but never actually began collecting funds. While a lower bound of 82%-90% for value-weighted returns is surprisingly high, there are two potential caveats that we need to worry about. First, we calculate the return by assuming ICO investors can sell their tokens at the first day’s opening market price, even though the depth at that price might be negligible. Second, the overall cryptocurrency asset class has performed well since the first ICO and we do not know whether this explains the high ICO returns (even when denominated in Bitcoin). We examine each of these issues and present results in Table 4. In Panel A of Table 4, we use post-listing volume and price data to investigate how ICO investors would perform if they staggered their sell orders over a longer time horizon (of up to two months) instead of potentially suffering a large liquidity penalty from selling all of their shares at the first available market price. Column (1) reproduces the results from the first column of Table 3 (i.e., setting the sales price to the first day’s opening price) to allow comparisons with the remaining columns. For Column (2), we assume the investor sells her tokens at the same prices as the first $1 million in volume. For each token-day, we calculate that day’s average price (averaging the open and close prices) and then calculate a volume-weighted average of the daily average price across the first N days where N is set

to be the number of days until a cumulative $1 million in trading has occurred. If N is greater than 60, meaning there was less than $1 million in volume in the first 60 days, we assume the remaining fraction of tokens were sold at 50% of the closing price on the 60th day. The 50% discount represents the imputed liquidity penalty to the investor for selling all her remaining tokens on that day. For example, if only $400,000 in tokens were traded over the first 60 days, we assume 40% of tokens were sold at the volume-weighted average price across those 60 days and the remaining 60% of tokens were sold at half of the 60th day closing price. We repeat this exercise in Columns (3) and (4) of Table 4 using volume limits of $10 million and $50 million, essentially requiring the ICO investor to spread out her token sales over longer periods of time to ensure the existence of enough depth in the market for her sales. The results across the last three columns of Panel A show that returns are not significantly affected by forcing slower liquidation of tokens by the ICO investor. The main reason is that tokens actually increase in price after their listing date (as we will show in greater detail in Section 5), so not immediately liquidating her position actually helps the investor get better returns. This leads to higher returns in Column (2) compared to Column (1). As we increase the volume requirements in Columns (3) and (4), the 60-day cutoff becomes more important and more tokens are sold by the investor at a 50% discount. This leads to declining average returns with higher volume limits. Still, even for investors who require $50 million in volume over which to sell their tokens and also face a 60-day deadline at which time they have to sell their remaining tokens at a large discount, the value-weighted average return is still a significant 142% (116% in Bitcoin), indicating that the depth for token sales is not a major concern for calculating true return.

In Panel B of Table 4, we analyze the effect of the cryptocurrency asset class on ICO returns by dividing the sample into five groups, or quintiles, based on the average cumulative return of Bitcoin from the ICO end date to the day the token starts trading. This helps us to predict what ICO returns might look like in a different sample period when cryptocurrencies are not experiencing significant price appreciation. Column (1) shows ICO returns for the lowest quintile, an average Bitcoin return of -22% and always less than -13%. Even for ICOs that occurred during this worst climate for cryptocurrencies, the equal-weighted average return, in dollars, was 124%, and the average value-weighted return, in dollars, was 62%. Not surprisingly, in better cryptocurrency climates in the remaining four columns, returns were even better. Still, across all five regimes, value- weighted average returns were no worse than 62%, suggesting that the positive returns to ICOs are not an artifact of the particular cryptocurrency wave that makes up our sample. Next, for Table 5, we examine the cross-sectional determinants of ICO pricing, and try to understand why entrepreneurs sell their tokens below market prices during the offering. We are faced with a significant selection problem since we only know the market prices of ICOs whose tokens go on to be listed, and in order to go on to list your token, you need to raise money which is easier to do if you sell your token at a bigger discount. In order to handle this problem, we use the Heckman (1976, 1979) technique for correction of sample selection but calculate the efficient full information maximum likelihood estimator instead of the two-step estimator. The selection variable is the natural logarithm of the capital raised in the ICO since this is the primary determinant of whether an ICO is successful and the token goes on to be listed. Our dependent variable across all regressions

is the natural logarithm of the ratio of First opening price to ICO price, which is also the natural logarithm of one plus the return. In Column (1) of Table 5, we run an OLS regression of ICO returns on four variables: the date of the ICO, the natural log of the ICO price, an indicator for whether there was a presale, and the age of the Twitter account of the platform at the start of the ICO. In Columns (2) and (3), we instead run this specification using the Heckman technique, and in Column (3), calculate prices in Bitcoin units instead of dollars. Across all three specifications, we find a negative estimate on the Date variable, which is statistically significant in the Heckman tests. The estimate is -0.0007 (per day), so multiplying this figure by 365 yields approximately a 25-percentage point estimated reduction in ICO returns for an ICO that is one year more recent. We also find a negative and significant coefficient on the nominal ICO price in all three specifications. This is consistent with ICO investors suffering from nominal price illusion which causes higher market demand (and thus higher returns relative to the ICO price) for tokens with low nominal prices and low demand (and thus lower returns) for high-priced tokens. Finally, there is a negative and weakly-significant (at the 10% level) coefficient on the pre-ICO indicator, suggesting some learning about the market value of their token during the pre-ICO, helping entrepreneurs properly price their tokens at the ICO. Interestingly, in contrast with IPOs, there is no indication that more established companies, with a longer track record as proxied by the length of time since their Twitter account was activated, suffer from less underpricing. This could be because there is very little information available in general on these firms, or perhaps their Twitter account age is a weak proxy for their age or the information available about them.

In Columns (4) through (6) of Table 5, we add several additional explanatory variables for which we have worse data coverage or which might be endogenously determined with price. The rule of law rating does not significantly affect ICO returns, nor does their Twitter activity before or during the ICO. The amount of capital raised is a function of the token price discount relative to the market price (i.e., there is higher investor demand for an asset at a lower price), so it’s hardly surprising to find a significant positive coefficient on capital raised. Also, the coefficient on the Date variable is not affected by adding Log Capital raised, which indicates that the Date variable is not simply picking up the effect of smaller ICOs after cryptocurrencies sharply declined in value after January 2018. We study the relationship between Twitter activity and followers, and market prices in the next section of the paper. 4b. Cryptocurrencies and information distribution through Twitter Our next task is to understand how a platform’s social media activity (on Twitter) ties in to the value of its token. Twitter activity also allows us to quantify the survival rate of crypto-companies after they finish raising capital, in order to get a better understanding of how many of the ICOs were failures or scams. In this section, we are using Twitter followers as a proxy for company users and Tweets as a proxy for company announcements and level of activity. First, we examine the relationship between number of Twitter followers and market capitalization to see if the theories about positive network externalities from a critical mass of users is actually borne out by the data. We only have data on the current number of followers, as of May 8, 2018, so we relate this to the market capitalization on the same date.

We have 1150 cryptocurrencies, including 632 that didn’t have an ICO, for which we have both variables available and we plot these assets (after log transformations of both x and y variables) in Figure 4. Unsurprisingly, the estimated coefficient on the best-fit line in Figure 4 is positive with more users equating to a large market capitalization. More interestingly, the value of the coefficient is 1.2 (with a standard error of 0.033), indicating that it is also statistically greater than one. Thus, for each 1% increase in users, the market capitalization increases by 1.2%, which is consistent with the increasing returns to user adoption in peer-to-peer platforms where these tokens are to be used for economic Next, we use Twitter activity to estimate short-term survival rates for the three types of ICOs that we encounter: those that don’t report raising any money and that don’t list on an exchange, those that report raising capital but don’t list, and those that list. We start by providing summary statistics on each of the categories in the first three columns of Table 6. Out of 694 ICOs in the first category, 51.4% never even opened a Twitter account and an additional 7.8% opened a Twitter accounts but had no activity during the ICO. This supports our hypothesis that most of the so-called ICOs in this class never made it past the earliest planning stage and should not be considered as losses when calculating average returns to ICO investors. Out of 420 ICOs in the category of those that raised capital but didn’t list, 21.2% never opened a Twitter account and another 5.2% opened a Twitter account but had no activity during the ICO. These figures are much smaller than for the first category so most of these ICOs were actually legitimate and should be included in calculating average returns, although many could have refunded their proceeds (due to inadequate funds) so they would not have created a loss for investors. Finally, only 2.7% of

the 440 ICOs that listed never opened a Twitter account and another 6.8% weren’t active during the ICO. Such low figures are consistent with these ICOs being successful enough for the tokens to be listed on an exchange. In Columns (4) through (9) of Table 6, we look at Twitter intensity (and the number of inactive users) during the ICO and in 30-day increments for the 150 days after the end of the ICO. We restrict our analysis for these specifications to tokens that have a Twitter account and were active during the ICO. For ICOs that failed to raise capital but were active during the ICO activity, their Twitter activity decays very quickly from 1.48 Tweets per day during the ICO to 0.28 Tweets per day in the fifth month, and inactivity rises to 59.2% in the fifth month. Inclusion of the ICOs with no Twitter accounts or no ICO Twitter activity, implies an overall survival rate for this category after four months of 17%. Twitter intensity is higher for those ICOs that raised capital and although it declines from the ICO period to the post-ICO periods, it doesn’t decay with time, stabilizing at around 0.8 Tweets per day. Total inactivity rises to 35.2% in the second month, so the overall survival rate for this category in the fifth month is 48%. For listed ICOs, Twitter intensity is even higher than for the first two categories and also is stable over time, remaining at around 1.5 Tweets per day. Total inactivity rises to only 6.8% for an overall survival rate for this category in the fifth month of 83%. Since most of the capital to crypto- companies goes to firms in the last category, our analysis indicates that the fraction of funds invested in firms that become inactive after the ICO (potential scams) is only 11%. Finally, we investigate how daily Twitter activity is related to market returns by regressing daily returns (log-transformed to minimize effect of outliers) on daily Twitter intensity (number of Tweets) with leads and lags, and then report the results in Table 7. In

Column (1), the main explanatory variables are same-day and prior-day Twitter intensity, and we also control for lagged market capitalization and two lags of the dependent variable, which is important in case there is short-term autocorrelation. Same-day Twitter intensity is positively associated with returns, with a coefficient of 0.2% (t-statistic of 7.56). Since firms are more likely to announce and amplify good news than bad news, it is not surprising that a Tweet is an indication of a good-news day, which explains the higher In Column (2) of Table 7, we add additional lags for Twitter intensity over the last five days. As in Column (1), there is a positive coefficient on today’s Twitter intensity and negative coefficients on most lags of Twitter intensity. However, the effect of previous day’s Twitter intensity is no longer significant as countervailing effects from the past and present offset each other. In Column (3), we add two additional variables for the average Twitter intensity from 10 days to 6 days before today, and for 40 days to 11 days before today, to control for the platform’s typical level of activity. Both new variables have negative and significant coefficients that are very similar to each other, an indication that Twitter activity continues to negatively predict returns as far ahead as 40 days. Even after controlling for these typical measures of activity, the two-day and three-day lags still have a negative coefficient while the one-day lag now has a significant positive coefficient. In Column (4) of Table 7, we add token fixed effects to absorb cross-sectional variation in Twitter intensity, while in Column (5), we replaced all Twitter intensity variables with log-transformations (natural logarithm of one plus the variable) to minimize the effect of outliers. In both specifications, the results are very similar to those in Column (3). Finally, in Column (6), we add five leads of Twitter intensity, and find positive

coefficients that decline with time, likely an indication that some firms are announcing good news with a lag. In summary, we show that past high levels of social media activity are generally correlated with lower returns, an indication of overreaction to news and reversals. On the other hand, returns are positively associated with today’s activity (and that in the near future), likely due to a bias for good news in company announcements. Thus, for cryptocurrency returns, the motto should be: “no news is bad news.” 5. Returns after tokens are exchange-listed In this section, we calculate average returns to investors who purchase tokens (that had been originally sold through an ICO) at the opening price on the day that each token is first listed, and hold each token for anywhere from one day to one year. Our main goal is to understand whether the high returns to ICO investors are reversed after tokens are traded in the market, as happens to stocks after their initial public offering. Figure 5 shows the average cumulative returns to investing in tokens at their initial price, in comparison to a Token Index (in gray) and Bitcoin (in orange). In Table 8, for each of seven holdings periods, we report raw buy-and-hold returns and abnormal returns after three different adjustments: Bitcoin-adjusted returns, token index-adjusted returns, and match-adjusted returns. We also perform the same exercise with alphas from five traditional asset pricing models (CAPM, Fama-French three-factor model, etc.), and find nearly identical results to the raw buy-and-hold returns, so those results are not reported in Table 8. The first row of Table 8 shows that the average first-day raw return (from open to close) is 16% (t-statistic of 9.17), and ranges from 14.1% to 16.1% after adjustments. In the second row, at a one-week horizon, raw return averages 33.2% (t-statistic of 4.65), and

ranges from 29.3% to 30.7% after adjustments. Two-week average returns are not much different from one-week returns, but at the 30-day horizon, raw return averages 67.1% (t- statistic of 3.33), ranging between 41.4% and 57.7% after adjustments. Token average returns continue to increase with longer holding periods. As holding periods get longer, the number of tokens that started trading long enough ago to have reached that age by the time our sample period ends declines and the volatility of cryptocurrencies increases standard deviations, both acting to reduce statistical significance. For the 180-day holding period, adjusted returns range from 152.8% to 242.5%, but with t-statistics all less than two. Unlike ICO underpricing, the results for long-run performance (at least in the first year) run completely counter to what prior research has shown for initial public offerings. This could be due to the lack of a lockup period for most ICOs, which would cause the opening price to already reflect the supply from insider sellers, while for IPOs, the supply would be released after the lockup leading to lower returns. Another explanation is that ICOs are much younger and riskier and thus need to provide a high expected rate of return to induce investor demand. ICOs have the potential to change how startup companies raise money, providing more control to entrepreneurs, greater liquidity to investors, and additional investment opportunities to early adopters. In this paper, we document that tokens are sold in ICOs at a significant discount to their market price (and at a much greater discount than IPOs), generating at least an 82% average abnormal return for the representative (i.e. weighted by capital invested) ICO investor. We analyze the determinants of this underpricing, and

find that it has declined over time, and is less of an issue when firms do a preliminary offering before the ICO or charge a higher nominal price. Unlike with IPOs, it does not seem to be related to the level of information asymmetry, as proxied by the age of the company We calculate token returns after the asset is listed on an exchange, and find that prices continue to drift higher, generating an abnormal return of approximately 50% in just the first 30 days. We also show that there is a positive and convex relationship between (log) market cap and (log) number of Twitter users, that nearly all ICO capital is raised by crypto-companies that continue to be active (on Twitter) after 120 days, and that daily Twitter intensity is associated with positive returns that day but negative returns in the future, suggesting overreaction and reversals. Our paper shows that ICOs investors are compensated handsomely for investing in new unproven platforms through unregulated offerings. It suggests that scams, while plentiful in number, are not as important in terms of stolen capital because investors are shrewd enough to spot (and underfund) them. It also shows how ICOs are both similar to and different from IPOs. Regulatory uncertainty in the United States and around the world has recently slowed the explosive growth in ICOs, but our findings suggest that while regulators should continue to deter fraudulent activities, they need to be careful not to throw out the baby with the bathwater.

Adhami, Saman, Giudici, Giancarlo, Martinazzi, Stefano, 2018. Why do businesses go crypto? An empirical analysis of initial coin offerings, Journal of Economics and Amsden, Ryan, Schweizer, Denis, 2018. Are blockchain crowdsales the new “gold rush”? Success determinants of initial coin offerings, Concordia University working paper. Barry, Christopher, Muscarella, Chris, Peavy, John, Vetsuypens, Michael, 1990. The role of venture capital in the creation of public companies: Evidence from the going public process, Journal of Financial Economics 27, 447–471. Beatty, Randolph, Ritter, Jay, 1986. Investment banking, reputation, and the underpricing of initial public offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 15, Benveniste, Lawrence, Spindt, Paul, 1989. How investment bankers determine the offer price and allocation of new issues, Journal of Financial Economics 24, Birru, Justin, Wang, Baolian, 2016. Nominal price illusion, Journal of Financial Boreiko, Dmitri, Sahdep, Navroop, 2018. To ICO or not to ICO – Empirical analysis of initial coin offerings and token sales, Free University of Bolzano working paper. Brav, Alon, Gompers, Paul, 1997. Myth or reality? The long‐run underperformance of initial public offerings: Evidence from venture and nonventure capital‐backed companies, Journal of Finance 52, 1791–1821. Catalini, Christian, Gans, Joshua, 2017. Some simple economics of the blockchain, Communications of the ACM, forthcoming. Catalini, Christian, Gans, Joshua, 2018. Initial coin offerings and the value of crypto tokens, MIT working paper. Chang, Jen-Wen, 2016. The economics of crowdfunding, American Economic Journal: Chemla, Gilles, Tinn, Katrin, 2019. Learning through crowdfunding, Management Science Chod, Jiri, Lyandres, Evgeny, 2018. A theory of ICOs: diversification, agency and information asymmetry, Management Science, forthcoming. Cong, Lin William, Li, Ye, Wang, Neng, 2018. Tokenomics: dynamic adoption and valuation, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Cong, Lin William, He, Zhiguo, 2019. Blockchain disruption and smart contracts, Review of Financial Studies 32, 3412–3460. Davydiuk, Tetiana, Gupta, Deeksha, Rosen, Samuel, 2019. De-crypto-ing signals in initial coin offerings: Evidence of rational token retention, Carnegie Mellon working paper. Easley, David, O’Hara, Maureen, Basu, Soumya, 2019. From mining to markets: the evolution of bitcoin transaction fees, Journal of Financial Economics 134, 91–109. Ellman, Matthew, Hurkens, Sjaak, 2015. Optimal crowdfunding design, Barcelona Graduate School working paper. Fisch, Christian, 2019. Initial coin offerings (ICOs) to finance new ventures, Journal of Business Venturing 34, 1–22. Florysiak, David and Schandlbauer, Alexander, 2019. The information content of ICO white papers, University of Southern Denmark working paper. Habib, Michel, Ljunqvist, Alexander, 2001. Underpricing and entrepreneurial wealth losses in IPOs: Theory and evidence, Review of Financial Studies 14, 433–458. Hanley, Kathleen Weiss, Hoberg, Gerard, 2010. The information content of IPO prospectuses, Review of Financial Studies 23, 2821–2864. Harvey, Campbell, 2014. Cryptofinance, Duke University working paper. Heckman, James, 1976. The common structure of statistical models of truncation, sample selection and limited dependent variables and a simple estimator for such models, Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 5, 475–492. Heckman, James, 1979. Sample selection bias as a specification error, Econometrica 47, Helwege, Jean, Liang, Nellie, 2004. Initial public offerings in hot and cold markets, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 541–569. Howell, Sabrina, Niessner, Marina, Yermack, David, 2019. Initial coin offerings: Financing growth with cryptocurrency token sales, Review of Financial Studies, Huang, Winifred, Meoli, Michele, Vismara, Silvio, 2019. The geography of initial coin offerings, Small Business Economics, forthcoming. Ibbotson, Roger, Jaffe, Jeffrey, 1975. “Hot issue” markets, Journal of Finance 30, 1027–

Krueckeberg, Sinan, Scholz, Peter, 2019. Cryptocurrencies as an asset class, Cryptofinance and Mechanisms of Exchange, Springer International Publishing, 1–28. Li, Jiasun, Mann, William, 2018. Initial coin offering and platform building. UCLA Liu, Yukun, Tsyvinski, Aleh, Wu, Xi, 2019. Common risk factors in cryptocurrency, Yale Ljunqvist, Alexander, Nanda, Vikram, Singh, Rajdeep, 2006. Hot markets, investor sentiment, and IPO pricing, Journal of Business 79, 1667–1702. Loughran, Tim, Ritter, Jay, 2004. Why has IPO underpricing changed over time? Financial Management 33, 5–37. Maksimovic, Vojislav, Pichler, Pegaret, 2001. Technological innovations and initial public offerings, Review of Financial Studies 14, 459–494. Momtaz, Paul, 2018a, Initial coin offerings, UCLA working paper. Momtaz, Paul, 2018b, Putting numbers on the coins: the pricing and performance of initial coin offerings, UCLA working paper. Ritter, Jay, 1984. The “hot issue” market of 1980, Journal of Business 57, 215–240. Ritter, Jay, 1991. The long-run performance of initial public offerings, Journal of Rock, Kevin, 1986. Why new issues are underpriced, Journal of Financial Economics 15, Rossetto, Silvia, 2008. The price of rapid exit in venture capital-backed IPOs, Annals of Saleh, Fahad, 2017. Blockchain without waste: proof-of-stake, NYU working paper. Sockin, Michael, Xiong, Wei, 2018. A model of cryptocurrencies. University of Texas Stoffels, Jaron, 2017. Asset pricing of cryptocurrencies and momentum based patterns, Erasmus School of Economics working paper. Strausz, Roland, 2017. A theory of crowdfunding: a mechanism design approach with demand uncertainty and moral hazard, American Economic Review 107, 1430–76.

Yermack, David, 2017. Corporate governance and blockchains, Review of Finance 21,

Figure 1: World map of initial coin offerings Figure 1 colors countries based on the number of ICOs that were completed in each country prior to April 30, 2018. Dark red indicates more than 100 ICOs, crimson indicates 51 to 100 ICOs, lighter red indicates 26 to 50 ICOs, pink indicates 11 to 25 ICOs, and yellow indicates 6-10 ICOs. All other countries had five or fewer ICOs.

Figure 2: Initial coin offerings by date and capital raised Figure 2 is a scatter plot where each point represents an ICO. The x-value is the date that the ICO ended and the y-value is how much the ICO raised. Red (x) indicates ICOs that have not listed, Green (circle) indicates listings within 60 days, and Blue (diamond) are listings after 60 days. Figure 3: Initial coin offerings by date and investor returns Capital raised ($ Millions) Initial Coin Offerings by Date and Capital Raised Listed <= 60 Days Listed > 60 Days

Figure 3 is a scatter plot where each point represents an ICO. The x-value is the date that the ICO ended and the y-value is the natural logarithm of the ratio of the first day’s opening price of the token to its ICO price (prices are in Bitcoin). The red dotted line is the best fit line. Log (First Opening Price/ICO Price) Initial Coin Offerings by Date and Returns to Investors

Figure 4: Plot of current market capitalization on current number of followers Figure 4 is a scatter plot where each point represents a traded cryptocurrency. The x-value is the natural logarithm of the number of Twitter followers on May 6, 2018 and the y-value is the natural logarithm of the market cap (in $1000s) on that date. The red dotted line is the best fit line. Log Marketcap (Iin $1000s) Log Number of Twitter Followers Cryptocurrencies by Number of Twitter Followers and Marketcap Slope = 1.2 [SE = 0.033]

Figure 5: Initial coin offering post-listing cumulative returns Figure 5 shows (in blue) the average buy-and-hold cumulative returns (for horizons less than 250 days) from investing in ICOs after they are listed on an exchange. For comparison, it also shows average returns to investing instead in a token index, which is a value-weighted average of all tokens, (in gray) or investing in Bitcoin (in yellow) at the time each ICO is listed. 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250 Post-Listing Cumulative Return in Percent

Table 1: ICO summary statistics Table 1 presents summary statistics on variables related to Initial Coin Offerings (ICOs). Panel A presents summary statistics for 2,390 ICOs that were completed on or before April 30, 2018. For each variable, it shows the number of non-missing observations, along with the cross-sectional mean, standard deviation, 10th, 50th, and 90th percentile values. Panel B reports means (and medians in brackets) for the same variables as Panel A but with six subsamples. Column (1) shows summary statistics for all ICOs that have no reported amount for raised capital, Column (2) shows them for ICOs that raised capital but were not listed on an exchange, Column (3) shows them for ICOs that raised capital and were listed on an exchange. Column (4) provides summary statistics for all ICOs that were completed on or before June 30, 2017, Column (5) for all ICOs that were completed between July 1, 2017 and December 31, 2017, and Column (6) for all ICOs that were completed on or after January 1, 2018. Panel C reports mean values for the same variables as Panel A for five geographic regions. Raised Cap is a dummy variable that equals one for all ICOs that raised capital, and zero otherwise. Listed is a dummy variable that equals one for all ICOs whose tokens were listed on an exchange, and zero otherwise. Capital raised is the amount (in millions of dollars) that was raised during the ICO. ICO price is the nominal price (in dollars) of the token during the ICO. Hardcap is the maximum amount (in millions of dollars) that could be raised during the ICO, which, when hit, would cause the offering to end. Tokens % sold is the percent of all tokens that would be sold during the ICO. Pre-ICO is a dummy variable that equals one if there was an earlier presale or pre-ICO for the token, and zero otherwise. Length of ICO is the number of days between the start and end of the ICO. Country Rule of law is the World Bank “rule of law” rating (median country has a value of zero) for the country from which the ICO was launched. Country GDP per capita is the GDP-per-capita (as of 2016, in dollars) for the country from which the ICO was launched. Twitter age is the number of months between the date when the platform’s Twitter account was activated and the ICO start date. Pre-ICO Twitter intensity is the average number of tweets per day in the six months before the ICO. ICO Twitter intensity is the average number of tweets per day during the ICO.





Table 2: Summary statistics for listed crypto-tokens Table 2 presents summary statistics for 609 cryptocurrencies that were sold through an ICO and listed on an exchange. For each variable, it shows the number of non-missing observations, along with the cross-sectional mean, standard deviation, 10th, 50th, and 90th percentile values. If a token was already listed before the start of the ICO, it is not included in this sample. Days to listing is the number of days between the completion of the ICO and the first trading day. It is negative for 44 tokens which were exchange-listed before the ICO was officially completed. ICO price is the nominal price (in dollars) of the token during the ICO, as in Table 1. First opening price is the first (opening) price on the first day of trading, and First closing price is the last price on the first day of trading. Cryptocurrencies exchanges are open all the time so the “close” is based on midnight Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). ICO->first open ROR is the rate of return from the ICO price to the first day’s opening price, while ICO->first open ROR is the rate of return from the ICO price to the first day’s closing price. First day marketcap is the market capitalization of the cryptocurrency based on its opening price on the first day of trading. For tokens which are missing values for their first day’s market capitalization, we impute number of tokens (and use them to calculate market-cap) using the first available market capitalization. First month volume is the average daily volume (in millions of dollars) in the first 30 days of trading. Capital raised is the amount (in millions of dollars) that was raised during the ICO, as in Table

Table 3: Returns to investing at ICO price and selling at first open Table 3 presents average returns from investing in tokens at their ICO price, holding them until they are listed, and then selling them at the first day’s opening price. The first two rows show average equal-weighted returns, assuming a naive investor who provides the same amount of funds for each project, while the last two rows show average value-weighted returns (weighted by capital raised), which assume a representative investor who uses the same factors that determine how much each project raises to decide the amount of funds to invest in that project. First and third rows show the returns in dollars, while the second and fourth rows convert prices to bitcoin (at the exchange rate for that day) before calculating returns. Column (1) shows returns for the sample of ICOs that were listed within 60 days. Columns (2) and (3) show returns for the sample of ICOs that raised capital and imputes returns of -50% (and -100% in Column (3)) to all tokens that were not listed or were listed after 60 days. Columns (4) and (5) show returns for the entire sample of ICOs and imputes returns of -50% (and -100% in Column (5)) to all tokens that were not listed or were listed after 60 days. All ICOs that ended on or after March 1, 2018 are dropped from the sample. T-statistics, using heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors, are shown in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels. Raised Cap = 1 Imputed ROR for unlisted:

Table 4: Returns to ICO investing – Liquidity and sensitivity to aggregate crypto-market Table 4 presents average returns from investing in tokens at their ICO price, as in Table 3, but using different methods for calculating selling price (in Panel A) and for different subsamples of ICOs sorted on Bitcoin performance between the ICO end date and the listing date (in Panel B). In Column (1) of Panel A, returns to the ICO investor are calculated assuming the investor is able to sell all tokens at the first day’s opening price (duplicating Column (1) of Table 3). In Columns (2) through (4), the sales price is now the volume-weighted average price (daily price is now the average of each day’s open and close) over the first N days, when N is the minimum of the number of days by which the cumulative dollar volume reaches the defined volume limit or 60 days. The volume limit is defined to be $1 million in Column (2), $10 million in Column (3), and $100 million in Column (4). If the cumulative volume does not hit the volume limit by the end of the 60th day, we assume the remaining fraction of the tokens are sold at the closing price of the 60th day with a 50% liquidity penalty. In Panel B, we split the sample of ICOs into five groups (quintiles) based on the return of Bitcoin between the ICO end date and the listing date, and report returns from investing at the ICO price and selling at the first day’s opening price, separately for each quintile. All ICOs that ended on or after March 1, 2018 are dropped from the sample. T-statistics, using heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors, are shown in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels. Panel A: Returns using volume-weighted selling price calculations over first 60 days

Panel B: Returns for quintiles based on bitcoin performance from end of ICO to listing

Table 5: Cross-sectional determinants of ICO pricing Table 5 present estimated coefficients from cross-sectional regressions using OLS (in Columns (1) and (4)) and Heckman (1979) procedure using maximum likelihood estimation. The dependent variable in each regression is the natural logarithm of the ratio of the first day’s opening price of the token to its ICO price. In Columns (1) and (2), the prices are denominated in dollars, while in columns (3) through (6), they are denominated in Bitcoins to adjust for changes in cryptocurrency values from the ICO to listing. Predictive variables are defined in Table 1. Date is defined as the number of days since January 1, 1960 (this is based on how dates are defined in Stata). T-statistics, using heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors, are shown in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels. Log (First Opening Price/ICO Price) Country Rule of law Length of ICO (days) LR test for rho=0 p-value Table 6: Twitter official account activity during and after ICOs

Table 6 presents the Twitter official account activity for three different categories of ICOs: those that didn’t raise capital and didn’t list, those that raised capital and didn’t list, and those that listed. For each ICO category, we present the number observations for that category in Column (1), the fraction of ICOs that don’t have a Twitter account in Column (2), and the fraction of ICOs that have an account but had no activity during the ICO in Column (3). For the remaining calculations, we exclude all the ICOs with no account or no Twitter activity during the ICO. In Columns (4) through (9), we report the cross-sectional average of Twitter intensity (average number of Tweets per day) for different periods of time (during and) after the ICO, along with the percentage of tokens that had no Twitter activity during each period. In Column (4), the period of interest is the ICO itself. The % of observations with 0 tweets is missing for this column because we dropped all ICOs that didn’t have Twitter intensity during the ICO, as explained above. In Column (5), the period of interest is the 30 days after the ICO; in Column (6), it is the period from 31 days to 60 days after the ICO; in Column (7), it is the period from 61 days to 90 days after the ICO; in Column (8), it is the period from 91 days to 120 days after the ICO; in Column (9), it is the period from 121 days to 150 days after the ICO.

Table 7: Regressions of daily cryptocurrency returns on Twitter intensity (with lags and leads) Table 7 presents estimated coefficients from OLS regressions of daily cryptocurrency returns on daily measures of Twitter intensity (number of Tweets from the cryptocurrency’s official Twitter account per day), with various lags and leads for the independent variable, along with controls. The dependent variable in all specifications is the natural logarithm of one plus the daily return (using closing prices), where the log transformation is done to minimize the effect of large outliers. In Column (1), the explanatory variables are today’s and yesterday’s Twitter intensity, along with lagged Log Marketcap, the natural logarithm of the market capitalization from the last period. In Column (2), we also add the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th lags of Twitter intensity. In Column (3), we also add Twitter intensity [-10,-6], the average Twitter intensity from 10 days to 6 days earlier, and Twitter intensity [-40,-11], the average Twitter intensity from 40 days to 11 days earlier. In Column (4), we add fixed effects for each asset. In Column (5), we replace each instance of Twitter intensity with its log transformation, i.e., natural logarithm of one plus the number of Tweets per day. In Column (6), we add five leads of Twitter intensity, for the next 5 days after the day that we measure the returns. All specifications also include time dummies, and various number of lags of the dependent variable (up to 10). T-statistics, using heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors, are shown in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.



Table 8: Cumulative post-listing returns for ICOs Table 8 presents the average cumulative buy-and-hold returns from investing in tokens that had an ICO at the opening price on the first day they are trading on an exchange, and then holding them for seven different horizons: 1 day, 7 days, 14 days, 30 days, 90 days, 180 days, and 365 days. Column (1) shows just the raw returns without adjusting for the cryptocurrency market. Column (2) adjusts each token’s return for the asset class returns by subtracting the cumulative return in the same period for Bitcoin. For Column (3), we create an index which is the value-weighted return of all cryptocurrency tokens (not coins like Bitcoin) and adjusts each token’s return by subtracting the cumulative return from investing in this index. For Column (4), we match each token on the listing date to the cryptocurrency that has the closest market capitalization to that token and that has been listed for at least one year. We then adjust each token’s return by subtracting the cumulative return from investing in the matched asset. T-statistics, using heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors, are shown in brackets. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

St. Vincent & the Grena Appendix - Table A1: Table A1 presents the full list of home countries of ICOs with total number of ICOs and total capital raised (in millions of dollars) for each country.

---NEW PAPER---

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES TOKENOMICS: DYNAMIC ADOPTION AND VALUATION NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH We are deeply grateful to Editor and two anonymous referees for very helpful comments. We thank Philip Bond, Matthieu Bouvard, Jaime Casassus, Tom Ding, Alex Frankel, Zhiguo He, Dirk Jenter, Andrew Karolyi, Yongjin Kim, Michael Sockin, Aleh Tsyvinski, Pietro Veronesi, Johan Walden, Larry Wall, Randall Wright, Yizhou Xiao, and seminar and conference participants at AEA/AFE (Atlanta), Ansatz Capital, Ant Financial, Atlanta Fed & GSU CEAR Conference on Financial Stability Implications of New Technology, Baidu Du Xiaoman Financial, CEPR ESSFM Gerzensee, Chicago Booth, City University of Hong Kong Information Systems), Emerging Trends in Entrepreneurial Finance Conference, Finance UC 14th International Conference, Georgetown, HKUST Finance Symposium, JOIM Conference on FinTech, LeBow/GIC/FRB Conference on Cryptocurrencies in the Global Economy, London Finance Theory Group Summer Conference, Luohan Academy First Digital Economy Conference (joint with Alibaba Damo Academy), National University of Singapore, NYU Stern FinTech Conferece, Norwegian School of Economics, PBC School of Finance, the 3rd Pensions and ESG Forum, RCFS/RAPS Conference in Baha Mar, 3rd Rome Junior Finance Conference, SEC DERA, Shanghai Forum, Stanford SITE, Tokenomics International conference on Blockchain Economics, Security and Protocols, University of Cincinnati, University of Washington Foster, University of Zurich/ETH, and UT Dallas Finance Conference for helpful comments. Cong gratefully acknowledges Xiao Zhang for excellent research assistance and the Center for Research in Security Prices for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies © 2020 by Lin William Cong, Ye Li, and Neng Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Tokenomics: Dynamic Adoption and Valuation Lin William Cong, Ye Li, and Neng Wang NBER Working Paper No. 27222 We develop a dynamic asset-pricing model of cryptocurrencies/tokens that allow users to conduct peer-to-peer transactions on digital platforms. The equilibrium value of tokens is determined by aggregating heterogeneous users' transactional demand rather than discounting cashflows as in standard valuation models. Endogenous platform adoption builds upon user network externality and exhibits an S-curve—it starts slow, becomes volatile, and eventually tapers off. Introducing tokens lowers users' transaction costs on the platform by allowing users to capitalize on platform growth. The resulting intertemporal feedback between user adoption and token price accelerates adoption and dampens user-base volatility. The Ohio State University Fisher College of Business 3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812 New York, NY 10027

Blockchain-based applications and cryptocurrencies have recently taken a center stage among technological breakthroughs in ﬁnance. The global market capitalization of cryp- tocurrencies has grown to hundreds of billions of US dollars. Nevertheless, academics, prac- titioners, and regulators have divergent views on how cryptocurrencies derive their value. In this paper, we provide a fundamentals-based dynamic valuation model for cryptocur- rencies. We focus on the endogenous formation of a digital marketplace or network (“the platform”) where its native cryptocurrency settles transactions and derives its value from underlying economic activities on the platform. To distinguish from cryptocurrencies as general-purpose medium of exchange, we shall refer to platform-speciﬁc currencies as to- kens. In contrast to ﬁnancial assets whose values depend on cash ﬂows, tokens derive value by enabling users to conduct economic transactions on the digital platform. Our model captures two key features shared by a majority of tokens. First, they are the means of payment on platforms that support speciﬁc economic transactions. For example, Filecoin is a digital marketplace that allows users to exchange data storage space for its tokens (FIL). Another example is Basic Attention Token (BAT): advertisers use BATs to pay for their ads, publishers receive BATs for hosting these ads, and web-browser users are rewarded BATs for viewing these ads. Second, user adoption exhibits network eﬀects. In both examples, the more users the platform has, the easier it is for any user to ﬁnd a transaction counterparty, and the more useful the tokens are. Our model also applies to tokens used on centralized platforms such as those being developed by platform businesses.1 Consequently, the market price of tokens and the platform user base (i.e., the total number of platform users) naturally arise as two key endogenous variables in our model. Our equilibrium token pricing formula exhibits three desirable features. First, token value depends on the platform’s productivity, which captures the platform’s functionality and other related factors (e.g., technological and regulatory changes). Second, the user base enters positively into the pricing formula, capturing the positive network externality of user 1Examples include online social networks (e.g., QQ coins on Tencent’s messaging platform) and online games (e.g., Linden dollar for Second Life and WoW Gold for World of Warcraft).

adoption. Third, user heterogeneity matters for both platform adoption and token pricing. Moreover, we clarify the roles of tokens in platform adoption by comparing token-based platforms and platforms that settle transactions with the numeraire consumption goods. Using the numeraire goods as means of payment incurs a carry cost, the forgone return from investing in ﬁnancial assets. In contrast, introducing tokens encourages early adoption of productive platforms, because agents expect token price appreciation, and thus, eﬀectively face a lower carry cost of using tokens for transactions. The expectation of future token price change also stabilizes user adoption in the presence of platform productivity shocks. Speciﬁcally, we consider a continuous-time economy with a continuum of agents who dif- fer in their transaction needs (i.e., types) on the platform. We broadly interpret transactions as including value transfers (e.g., Filecoin and BAT) and smart contracting (e.g., Ethereum). Accordingly, we model an agent’s utility ﬂow from platform transactions as a function of platform productivity that evolves exogenously, her type, the user base, and the real (nu- meraire good) value of the agent’s token holdings (“real token balance”). Importantly, this ﬂow utility increases with the user base, capturing the network eﬀects. We characterize the Markov equilibrium with platform productivity being the state variable. The model has two key endogenous variables, the user base and token price. In our model, agents make a two-step decision on (1) whether to adopt by paying a participation cost to become a platform user, and if so, (2) the real token balance. The token market clears by equating the agents’ demand and the ﬁxed supply. A key insight of our model is that users’ adoption decision exhibits not only static complementarity through the ﬂow utility of platform transactions but also an inter-temporal complementarity via the carry cost of holding tokens that depends on the endogenous variation of token price. Holding tokens as means of payment incurs a carry cost that is the forgone return from investing in ﬁnancial assets. However, on a promising platform with a positive productivity drift, such cost is partly oﬀset by the expected token price appreciation. Given a ﬁxed supply of tokens, the prospective growth of user base driven by productivity growth leads agents to expect more users in the future and thus a stronger demand for tokens, which implies an increase of token price. As such, even though users forgo the ﬁnancial assets’ returns by

holding tokens to transact, they are compensated by the expected appreciation of tokens. Introducing tokens also stabilizes the user base, making it less sensitive to platform pro- ductivity shocks. Consider a platform with growing yet stochastic productivity. A negative productivity shock reduces users’ transactional utility and thus lowers the user base. This negative eﬀect is mitigated by an increase in the expected token price appreciation. A lower current level of adoption implies a larger expected token price appreciation because more users can be brought onto the platform in the future. Consequently, the eﬀective token carry cost declines, encouraging adoption. Similarly, a positive productivity shock directly in- creases adoption, but its eﬀect is dampened because the pool of potential newcomers shrinks and the expected token price appreciation declines, resulting in a greater eﬀective carry cost. In the Markov equilibrium, our tokenized economy features an S-curve of user adoption – as the platform productivity grows, the user base expands slowly, and then the expansion speeds up before eventually tapering oﬀnear full adoption. We show that the user base is larger and more stable than that of a tokenless platform that has the same productivity process but uses the numeraire goods as means of payment. We derive an equilibrium token pricing formula that incorporates endogenous network eﬀects in an otherwise canonical Gordon growth formula. Token valuation boils down to solving an ordinary diﬀerential equation subject to intuitive boundary conditions. Just as tokens aﬀect the user-base dynamics, endogenous adoption is critical for understanding major asset-pricing issues surrounding tokens. First, the network eﬀects imply a large cross-sectional variation in token price among platforms in early stages of adoption. Second, adoption externality ampliﬁes the impact of productivity shocks on token price, creating “excess volatility”(e.g., Shiller, 1981). The ampliﬁcation is even stronger when we allow the productivity drift to increase with the user base — a form of community bootstrapping that practitioners emphasize. by allowing the productivity beta (systematic risk) to increase with adoption, our model generates an initial rise of token price followed by a decline and eventual stabilization, broadly consistent with the observed “bubbly” price dynamics. These results are in line with evidence (e.g., Liu and Tsyvinski, 2018; Shams, 2019).

In sum, our model features rich interactions between ﬁnancial markets and the real economy: the ﬁnancial side operates through the endogenous determination of token prices, whereas the real side manifests itself in the user adoption. By trading in the token market, users proﬁt from platform growth and eﬀectively bear a reduced carry cost of conducting transacting.2 For payment platforms, the prominent adoption problem in platform economics (e.g., Rochet and Tirole, 2006) is naturally connected with the carry cost in the classic models of money as transaction medium (e.g., Baumol, 1952; Tobin, 1956). Comparing with the traditional user subsidies, we demonstrate tokens’ advantages in accelerating and smoothing adoption. This new solution is often based on blockchains: decentralized consensus allows the token supply to be credibly ﬁxed, and thus, anchoring the token price to users’ demand.3 Among early economic studies on blockchain games and consensus generation mechanisms, Biais, Bisiere, Bouvard, and Casamatta (2019) and Saleh (2017) an- alyze mining/minting games in Proof-of-Work- and Proof-of-Stake-based public blockchains; Easley, O’Hara, and Basu (2019), Huberman, Leshno, and Moallemi (2019), and Cong, He, and Li (2018) study the market structure of miners; Cong and He (2018) examine the impact of decentralized consensus on industrial organization. We diﬀer by focusing on token users’ trade-oﬀand the resulting dynamic interaction between platform adoption and token pricing that apply to both centralized and decentralized platforms. We connect platform economics and asset pricing by demonstrating that the token price is anchored upon the platform-speciﬁc convenience yield (transactional value). Our treatment of convenience yield is related to Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) and earlier studies. Our contribution is to incorporate user network eﬀects in the convenience yield, and study the implications on platform adoption and token pricing. We emphasize agent heterogeneity and its asset-pricing implications. Instead of balance-sheet crises (e.g., He and Krishnamurthy, 2011, 2013; Brunnermeier and Sannikov, 2014), we model the heterogeneity 2Our model has complete information. Token capitalizes the otherwise non-tradable growth of platform user base, and thereby, accelerates adoption under network eﬀects. This is distinct from the informational eﬀects of ﬁnancial markets that feeds back into the real activities (see Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein, 2012). 3As pointed out by Hinzen, John, and Saleh (2019), the decentralized consensus often comes with a cost of payment delays for proof-of-work blockchains. Computer scientists and economists are active in studing alternative protocols (e.g., Saleh, 2017; Fanti, Kogan, and Viswanath, 2019).

of platform users and the resulting endogenous growth of user base. In our model, platform users expect proﬁts from selling tokens to future users. This mechanism is related to but diﬀerent from Harrison and Kreps (1978) and Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) as the expected capital gain in our model is due to the growth of user base rather than heterogeneous beliefs. We do not analyze the implications of blockchain technology on general-purpose curren- cies and monetary policies (e.g., Balvers and McDonald, 2017; Raskin and Yermack, 2016; Garratt and Wallace, 2018; Schilling and Uhlig, 2018). Instead, we focus on the endogenous interaction between token pricing and user adoption on platforms that serve niche markets with time-varying productivity. Therefore token pricing is anchored upon the platform’s productivity and the popularity of speciﬁc economic transactions it supports, such as adver- tisement (BAT) and digital storage (Filecoin). Among contemporary theories featuring token valuation in static settings, Sockin and Xiong (2018) study tokens as indivisible membership certiﬁcates for agents to match and trade with each other; Li and Mann (2018) argue that initial token oﬀering allows agents to coordinate by costly signaling through token acquisition; Pagnotta and Buraschi (2018) study Bitcoin pricing on exogenous user networks; Catalini and Gans (2018) examine developers’ pricing of tokens to fund projects and aggregate information; Chod and Lyandres (2018) contrast security token oﬀerings with traditional ﬁnancing.4 Our paper is the ﬁrst to clarify the role of tokens in capitalizing the endogenous platform growth, and thereby, reducing agents’ eﬀective carry cost of holding the transaction medium.5 In dynamic settings, Athey, Parashkevov, Sarukkai, and Xia (2016) emphasize the role of learning in agents’ decisions to use Bitcoin absent stochastic platform productivity and user network externality; Biais, Bisi`ere, Bouvard, Casamatta, and Menkveld (2018) emphasize the fundamental value of Bitcoin from transactional beneﬁts; Fanti, Kogan, and Viswanath (2019) provide a valuation framework for Proof-of-Stake (PoS) payment systems; Goldstein, Gupta, and Sverchkov (2019) study initial token oﬀerings that allow monopolistic platforms 4Tokens in our model facilitate transactions. They should be distinguished from security tokens that represent claims on issuers’ cashﬂows or rights to redeem products/services (e.g., Slice and Siafund tokens). 5The carry cost features prominently in classic models of money demand (e.g., Baumol, 1952; Tobin, 1956) and recent literature of cash management (e.g., Alvarez and Lippi, 2013; Bolton, Chen, and Wang, 2011; D´ecamps, Mariotti, Rochet, and Villeneuve, 2011; Li, 2017; Lucas and Nicolini, 2015).

to credibly commit to long-run competitive pricing of services. We diﬀer by studying the joint determination of user adoption and token valuation in a framework that highlights user heterogeneity, network externalities, and most importantly, inter-temporal feedback eﬀects. Moreover, our model is applicable to platforms owned by trusted third parties and permissioned blockchains as well as permissionless blockchains. In the remainder of the article, Section 2 sets up the model, and 3, and 4 solve the tokenless and tokenized economies, respectively. Section 5 discusses how tokens aﬀect user adoption and how endogenous adoption aﬀects token price; Section 6 discusses alternative solutions to platform adoption and trade-oﬀs between scale and decentralization that can potential limit the application of blockchain technologies in supporting tokenized platforms. A Model of Platform Economy Consider a continuous-time economy where a continuum of agents of unit measure con- duct peer-to-peer transactions on a blockchain platform or a general digital marketplace. The platform is characterized by At, the productivity that evolves according to a geo- = bµAdt + σAd bZA t is a standard Brownian motion under the physical measure and bµA and σA are constant parameters. We interpret At broadly. A positive shock to At can reﬂect technolog- ical advances, favorable regulatory changes, growing users’ interests, and increasing variety of activities feasible on the platform. Preferences for platform transactions. The platform allows agents to conduct transac- tions that are settled via a medium of exchange. We consider two cases for the medium: the generic good, which is the numeraire, and the local platform currency (token). We use xi,t to denote the value of agent i’s holdings of medium of exchange in units of the numeraire good. Conditioning on participating on the platform, a platform user i derives a

utility ﬂow from her holdings of the medium of exchange, xi,t, dvi,t = (xi,t)1−α (NtAteui)α dt −φdt −xi,trdt . Next, we explain the three terms in (2) and later discuss agents’ participation decision. is the transactional beneﬁts of xi,t, where Nt is the platform user base, ui is the agent’s type, At measures platform productivity, and α ∈(0, 1) is a constant.6 Let Ut denote the set of participating agents (with xi,t > 0), so formally, Nt ∈[0, 1] is the measure of Ut. We choose this speciﬁcation of utility ﬂow with the following considerations. First, the utility ﬂow increases in Nt. It captures the positive user network eﬀect, as it is easier to ﬁnd a transaction counterparty in a larger community. Second, the marginal utility decreases with xi,t, captured by α > 0. The exponents of xi,t and NtAteui sum up to one for analytical convenience. Third, agents’ transaction needs (or types), ui, are heterogeneous.7 Let G (u) and g (u) denote the cross-sectional cumulative distribution function and density function of ui, respectively. Both are continuously diﬀerentiable over the ﬁnite support [U, U]. To realize the transaction beneﬁts given in (3), the agent needs to incur a ﬂow cost φ per unit of time for platform participation corresponding to the second term in (2). For example, transacting on the platform takes eﬀort and attention. At any time t, agents may choose not to participate and then collect no utility. Naturally, agents with suﬃciently high ui choose to join the platform, while agents with suﬃciently low ui do not participate. In addition to φ, the agent has to incur an opportunity cost of rxi,t per unit of time to realize the transactional beneﬁts in (3). This cost is similar to those induced by the cash-in-advance constraints in monetary models where the opportunity costs of conducting transactions is the forgone interest payments on the money balance (e.g., Gal´ı, 2015; Walsh, 6Appendix A contains a theoretical foundation for this reduced-form ﬂow utility. 7For payment blockchains (e.g., Ripple), a high value of ui reﬂects agent i’s urge to conduct an in- ternational remittance. For smart-contracting blockchains (e.g., Ethereum), ui captures agent i’s project productivity. For decentralized computation (e.g., Dﬁnity) and data storage (e.g., Filecoin) applications, ui corresponds to the need for secure and fast access to computing power and data.

2003). It also resembles the carry cost of cash holdings in corporate ﬁnance models that emphasize external ﬁnancing frictions (e.g., Bolton, Chen, and Wang, 2011; Li, 2017). Valuing utilities from platform transactions. Because we consider a dynamic economy of inﬁnite horizon, the valuation of ﬂow utilities from platform activities requires a stochastic discount factor (SDF). For tractability, we consider the following widely-used speciﬁcation of SDF, which we denote by Λ: = −rdt −ηd bZΛ where r is the risk-free rate and η is the price of risk for systematic shock bZΛ The SDF is typically linked to agents’ consumption dynamics, so by specifying an exogenous SDF, we assume that agents’ utility from platform activities consti- tutes only a small part of their total utility. This echoes the models of an individual ﬁrm’s valuation where an exogenous SDF is directly parameterized (Chapter 7, Campbell, 2017). Let ρ denote the instantaneous correlation between the SDF shock and the platform A positive ρ implies a positive beta (Duﬃe, 2001). usefulness and quality of a particular platform evolves with the economy, as agents discover new ways to utilize the technology, which in turn depends on the progress of complementary technologies. Macro and regulatory events may also aﬀect the usage of a platform. It is more convenient to solve our model via the change-of-measure technique widely used in the derivatives pricing literature (Duﬃe, 2001). By Girsanov’s Theorem, we know that under the risk-neutral measure, the Brownian motion driving the SDF is ZΛ t = d bZΛ Therefore, under the risk-neutral measure, At follows = bµAdt + σAd bZA t ≡µAdt + σAdZA 8The standard no-arbitrage argument implies that the drift of the SDF has to equal to the negative interest rate. See Duﬃe (2001) for a textbook treatment.

Let yi,t denote agent i’s (undiscounted) cumulative payoﬀfrom platform activities, which depends on dvi,t (the transactional beneﬁts deﬁned in (2)) and may diﬀer on platforms with and without token as medium of exchange as will be speciﬁed shortly. Let bE and E denote the expectation under the physical and risk-neutral measure, respectively. Agent i maximizes This equality follows from the change-of-measure technique. Throughout the remainder of our paper, we conduct our analysis under the risk-neutral measure unless stated otherwise. Tokenless and Tokenized Economies On platforms with transactions settled by the numeraire good, agent i’s utility ﬂow only depends on whether she chooses to be a platform user, and if she does, the transactional beneﬁts of holding xi,t units of goods as means of payment: (xi,t)1−α (NtAteui)α −φ −rxi,t Here, the inner “max” operator gives the conditional demand xi,t if participating and the outer “max” operator reﬂects agent i’s option to leave the platform and obtain zero proﬁt. This tokenless model is analogous to the standard models of money holdings (e.g., Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2004), given that the real value of money balance, xi,t, generates a ﬂow utility via (xi,t)1−α (NtAteui)α dt but induces a cost of forgone interests via xi,trdt. Our novel modeling ingredient is the user network eﬀect—the positive externality of agents’ adoption decision— which is a deﬁning feature of digital platforms. In what follows, we introduce a native (crypto)currency on the platform, i.e., the token. To conduct transactions on the platform, users are required to use

tokens.9 The value of agent i’s token holdings, xi,t, satisﬁes the following identity: xi,t = Ptki,t , where Pt is the token price in terms of the numeraire good and ki,t is the units of tokens. The real (numeraire) value, xi,t = Ptki,t, rather than the token units, ki,t, appears in the transactional beneﬁts because the transaction utility depends on the numeraire value of goods and services that are transacted as in the standard monetary economic models. Without loss of generality, we write the equilibrium token price process as follows under t dt + PtσP Here, eµt and eσt can be any admissible stochastic processes. (12) is a re-writing of (11) where eµt = Pt µP eσt = Pt σP t can follow any admissible processes. We choose to work with µP rather than eµt and eσt, because the former set of notations is more convenient especially when we analyze our model’s asset-pricing predictions such as the expected token return and token return volatility. But we could have used eµt and eσt to obtain the same solution.10 Conditional on participating on the platform, agent i derives a total payoﬀthat includes the transactional beneﬁts of token holdings, i.e., dvi,t, and also the investment payoﬀdue to endogenous token price change: dvi,t + ki,tEt [dPt] . 9In Appendix D, we generalize our model to incorporate agents’ endogenous decisions on whether to use the numeraire good or token as medium of exchange, and show that our results are robust. 10Proposition B1 in Appendix B shows that Pt > 0 in equilibrium. Therefore, since Pt > 0, we can uniquely from (eµt, eσt) or infer (eµt, eσt) from , so these two sets of notations are equivalent.

By substituting ki,t = xi,t/Pt into (14), we rewrite the total payoﬀ: Using the deﬁnition µP t dt ≡E [dPt] /Pt, we can write the the total payoﬀas where the outer max accounts for agent i’ option to leave the platform and achieve zero proﬁt. In contrast to (8) of the tokenless economy that contains only dvi,t (the transactional beneﬁts), token introduces an additional term xi,tµP t dt due to the endogenous price variation. By substituting (2) into (16), we express dyi,t explicitly as follows: (xi,t)1−α (NtAteui)α −φ − Introducing tokens changes the unit carry cost for holding transaction medium from rdt to dt. Agents must hold a medium of exchange ( the numeraire good in the tokenless economy, or token in the tokenized economy) for dt to conduct transactions.11 During this holding period, in addition to incurring the opportunity cost of forgone interests, agents in the tokenized economy are exposed to the endogenous variation of token price. This feature is absent in our tokenless economy. We study a Markov equilibrium with At, the platform productivity, as the state variable whose dynamics generate the rational-expectation agents’ information ﬁltration. To focus on the dynamics of user adoption and demand, we ﬁx the token supply 11In blockchain-based systems, the holding period naturally arises because forging the ledger of transactions takes time. For example, the Bitcoin blockchain requires 10-11 minutes to generate consensus on transactions. This conﬁrmation period is necessary for the ﬁnality of transactions as shown by Chiu and Koeppl (2017).

to a constant M.12 The market clearing condition is where for those who do not participate, ki,t = 0. Deﬁnition 1. A Markov equilibrium with state variable At is described by agents’ decisions and equilibrium token price such that the token market clearing condition given by (18) holds and agents optimally decide to participate (or not) and choose token holdings. In our tokenless economy, the numeraire good is the medium of exchange. Conditional on joining the platform (i.e., xi,t > 0), the agent chooses xi,t to maximize (2), which implies: the marginal beneﬁt from transaction is equal to the carry cost of forgone interests on xi,t. Rearranging the optimality condition, we have: and the maximized proﬁt from participating on platform is then: 12This captures the majority real-world applications. More generally, blockchain technology allows supply to be based on explicit rules. This can be accommodated in the model by adding in an exogenous token inﬂation or deﬂation rates that are orthogonal to the endogenous adoption and token demand dynamics.

An agent participates only when dvi,t given in (21) is positive. That is, agent i participates if and only if ui ≥uNT is the endogenous threshold given by: = −ln (Nt) + ln Here, the superscript “NT” refers to the equilibrium value of the “no-token” (tokenless) economy. Given the distribution of ui, G (ui), the user base is thus given by: −ln (Nt) + ln (22) and (23) jointly determine uNT as functions of At. Proposition 1 (Tokenless Equilibrium). In the Markov equilibrium with At being the state variable, the user base N NT and user type threshold uNT solve (22) and (23). Addi- tionally, the user base, N NT , increases in At if the cross-sectional distribution of agent type, G (u), has an increasing hazard rate. Now consider a tokenized platform. As platform productivity At is the state variable, all endogenous variables are functions of At in equilibrium. For example, Pt = P(At). By applying Itˆo’s lemma to Pt = P(At), we obtain: dPt = dP (At) = P ′ (At)AtµA + 1 dt + P ′ (At) AtσAdZA By matching the coeﬃcients of dt and dZA t to (12), we obtain µP t as functions of At: t = µP (At) = P ′ (At) P (At) AtµA + 1 t = σP (At) = P ′ (At)

With tokens, agent i’s decision on the real balance of medium of exchange, inside the inner max operator in (17), is similar to (19) of the tokenless economy, but with tokens, the eﬀective carry cost is now r −µP t and the optimality condition agents’ token balance is: = r −µP (At) , where the marginal beneﬁt of transaction is equal to the carry cost. Rearranging the equa- the maximized proﬁt from participating on platform is then i,t given in (28) into (17), we obtain the following user-type cutoﬀthreshold ut = −ln (Nt) + ln and because only agents with ui ≥ut will participate, the user base is then given by Nt = 1 −G (ut) . Equations (30) and (31) solve ut = u (At) and Nt = N (At) as functions of At. Next, we derive an equilibrium token pricing formula. By using ki,t = xi,t/Pt and substi- tuting (28) into the market clearing condition (18), we obtain: Pt = N (At) S (At) At St ≡S (At) =

is the sum of all participating agents’ eui, measuring the aggregate transaction needs. Indus- try practices broadly corroborate the pricing formula (32). For example, as proxies for Nt and St respectively, daily active addresses (DAA) and daily transaction volume (DTV) are featured prominently in practitioners’ token valuation framework.13 But instead of heuristi- cally aggregating such inputs into a pricing formula, we derive the token pricing formula as equilibrium outcome together with endogenous user adoption. By substituting (25) into the market clearing condition (32), we obtain: rP (At) = P ′ (At) AtµA + 1 AtσA2 + (1 −α) While our token pricing equation (34) may appear similar to the Black-Scholes-type diﬀerential equation for derivatives pricing, the underlying economic force in our model is diﬀerent. The “ﬂow” term, (1 −α) P (At), in (34) comes from rearranging the market clearing condition (32) and reﬂects the aggregation of agents’ transactional demand for tokens. The Black-Scholes equation does not feature such a ﬂow term. Moreover, the Black-Scholes equation has a “theta” term – the variation of derivative value over time – because of ﬁnite maturity, while (34) does not have such term because token does not have maturity. Finally, platform productivity, At, the underlying fundamental that drives token price, is not tradable, so the coeﬃcient on P ′ (At) is µAAt, the drift of At under the risk- neutral measure, instead of r in the case of derivatives on tradable underlying assets whose risk-adjusted return must be r.14 We solve the preceding ODE for P (At) with the following boundary conditions. The lower boundary is given by: At→0 P (At) = 0 . As At = 0 is an absorbing state, the platform is not productive and no agent participates. Therefore, the token price is zero. When At is suﬃciently high, all agents participate. The 13See, for example, the articile on token valuation, Today’s Crypto Asset Valuation Frameworks, by Ashley Lannquist at World Economic Forum (Blockchain and Digital Currency). 14Appendix F2 provides a more detailed comparison between our token pricing equation (34) and the Black-Scholes derivative pricing equation.

upper boundary, which we denote by A, corresponds to the minimal level of At to have full adoption : Nt = 1. For At ≥A, the following Gordon Growth Formula for token price holds: P (At) = SAt where the aggregate transaction needs, St, is given by The value-matching and smooth-pasting conditions hold at A: P ′(A) = P The next proposition summarizes the equilibrium features of tokenized economy. Proposition 2 (Tokenized Equilibrium). Under the increasing hazard rate condition for G (u) and other regularity conditions, the Markov equilibrium with At as the state variable has the following properties: 1. Token price P (At) solves the ODE (34) subject to boundary conditions (35) and (38). t in the token price dynamics (12) are given by (25) and (26), respectively. 2. Given the token price dynamics, agents participate if ui ≥ut, given by (30), and the user base is Nt = 1 −G (ut), which increases in At and µP 3. Conditional on participation, the value of agents’ token holdings x∗ i,t is given by (28), which increases in At and µP The tokenless and tokenized economies diﬀer in agents’ means of payment. As in the cash-in-advance models (e.g., Gal´ı, 2015; Walsh, 2003), the cost of conducting transactions is comprised of the forgone interests on the balance of transaction medium.15 In the tokenless economy, this carry cost is rdt, the risk-adjusted return of any tradable assets. 15Appendix F1 compares our model setup with that of standard monetary models.

date t + dt date t + 2dt Transaction beneﬁts dvi,t ↑ User base Nt ↑ User base Nt+dt ↑ Token price Pt+dt ↑ User base Nt+2dt ↑ Token price Pt+2dt ↑ Figure 1: Adoption-Accelerating Eﬀect of Tokens. The black solid arrows point to the increases of the expected future productivity A, which lead to higher transaction beneﬁts of tokens, and in turn, larger user bases N. The blue dotted arrows show that increases in user base result in even higher transaction beneﬁts due to the user network externality. Finally, more users drive up the token prices P in future dates, which feed into a current expectation of price appreciation and greater adoption (red dash arrows). tokenized economy, this carry cost is dt due to the expected token return.16 Agents expect token price to appreciate when they expect higher future productivity (and thus larger user base and stronger token demand).17 Figure 1 illustrates the intertemporal feedback mechanism from token price dynamics to user adoption. In sum, tokens accelerate user adoption by capitalizing the expected user-base growth into an expected token return, reducing the eﬀective carry cost. In contrast, the numeraire good as means of payment does not deliver any ﬁnancial return to oﬀset the carry cost.18 16As shown by the optimality condition (27), token delivers a dominated risk-adjusted ﬁnancial return, t < r, but compensates transactional beneﬁts. Therefore, holding token is still optimal for users. 17We note that a predetermined token supply schedule is important. If token supply can arbitrarily increase ex post, then the expected token price appreciation is delinked from the the productivity growth and the resulting increase of user base and token demand. Pre-determinacy or commitment be credibly achieved through the decentralized consensus mechanism empowered by the blockchain technology. traditional monetary policy has commitment problem (Barro and Gordon, 1983). 18Admittedly, an expected capital loss, µP t < 0, discourages adoption by increasing the carry cost. In Appendix D, we extend our model: agents can choose between the numeraire good and token as transaction medium rather than always use either the numeraire good (Section 3) or token (Section 4). In this more general setting, agents only use tokens when µP t > 0, and thus, by introducing tokens, platforms accelerate adoption by simply expanding agents’ choice set, allowing them to pick the currency with the lowest carry

In this section, we ﬁrst present the planner’s solution and then use it as a benchmark to analyze the roles of tokens in the tokenless and tokenized economies. The planner’s problem is subject to the same platform transaction technology faced by users in the tokenless economy. However, unlike the individual users, the planner solves the adoption problem by taking into consideration the positive externalities of agents’ adoption decisions. The present value of aggregate platform transactional beneﬁts is given by: where E[ · ] is the expectation under the risk-neutral measure and dvi,t is given in (2). We solve (39) as follows. First, we show that similar to the tokenless economy, the set of users, Ut, is characterized by a cutoﬀthreshold: Ut = {i : ui,t ≥uPL Nt = 1 −G(uPL ). This follows from that it is in the planner’s interest to bring agents with higher ui on the platform for a given Nt. Second, solving the socially optimal demand, xi,t, boils down to maximizing dvi,t agent-by-agent, yielding the solution given by (20). By aggregating dvi,t over all participating agents, we obtain As (40) is linear in Nt, the planner chooses full participation by setting Nt = 1, if the platform productivity is suﬃciently high, i.e., if and only if At > APL, where and S is given by (37).

Figure 2: S-shaped User Adoption Curve in Tokenized and Tokenless Economies. This graph shows that the use base, Nt, in the tokenized economy (blue solid curve) and tokenless economy (red dash line) as functions of the logarithmic productivity ln (At). The gray scattered plot is based on data of normalized active user addresses (details in Appendix C). The vertical green dash line marks the level of productivity, beyond which the planner chooses full adoption, and below which the planner chooses zero Figure 2 reports the adoption dynamics from our numerical solutions for the tokenized economy, the tokenless economy, and the planner’s problem. The blue solid line in Figure 2 shows that the user base Nt in the tokenized economy is an S-shaped function of ln (At).19 When the platform’s productivity At is low, the user base Nt barely responds to changes in At. In contrast, when At is moderately high, Nt responds much more to changes in At. The growth of user base feeds onto itself – the more agents join the ecosystem, the higher transaction surplus each derives. User adoption eventually slows down when the pool of newcomers gets exhausted. We also plot the scattered data points of active user addresses, our proxy for Nt, that guide our choices of parameter values. In Appendix C, we detail the parameter choices and data sample construction. By comparing the adoption dynamics in the tokenized and tokenless economies, we see that the tokenized economy has faster adoption than the tokenless economy in Figure 2. 19The curve starts at ln (At) = −48.35 (At = 1e−21), a number we choose to be close to the left boundary, zero. The curve ends at ln (At) = 18.42 (At = 1e8), the touching point between P (At) and P (At).

Introducing tokens eﬀectively lowers the carry cost from rdt to (r −µP t )dt, because, under the current parameter values, µP t > 0. Tokens are of limited supply and are required for transactions, users expect tokens to appreciate when they expect adoption to grow. We also plot in Figure 2 the planner’s solution via the dash vertical line at ln which is given by (41). Recall that the planner chooses full adoption if At ≥APL and zero adoption otherwise. Relative to the planner’s solution, a tokenless economy features under- adoption as its Nt is below that of the planner’s solution (100%) when At ≥APL.20 This is because agents do not internalize the the positive network externalities of adoption. Introducing tokens lifts up the adoption curve relative to that of the tokenless economy but is still below the full-adoption level for At ≥APL. However, for At < APL, though not sharply visible in the ﬁgure, the tokenized economy features a positive level of adoption while the planner chooses zero adoption. Here by introducing tokens, we change the payment technology that is accessible to platform users. Even for the planner, requiring agents to hold the means of payment incurs a carry cost of rdt per numeraire value, but when tokens are available (and in the numerical solution, µP t > 0), the carry cost is reduced to and thus, the adoption level is higher. For tokens to accelerate adoption, there must be a market where tokens are traded and agents can form their expectation of token price change, t . Therefore, tokens reduce the carry cost of payment by capitalizing the future growth of user base, and this mechanism does not exist in the planner’s economy where agents cannot trade tokens and decide on xi,t voluntarily. Among the purported reasons for this common practice of introducing tokens, entrepreneurs foremost believe that using tokens can “bootstrap” the community. Heuristically, practition- ers have argued that tokens help grow the ecosystem and allow all participants to beneﬁt from the growth prospect of platforms, although no formal analysis has been provided. Our paper exactly examines this argument formally.

Figure 3: User-Adoption-Volatility Reduction Eﬀect. Panel A plots the volatility of user base, σN the tokenized (blue solid curve) and tokenless (red dotted curve) economies as functions of Nt, respectively. Panel B shows that the expected token return under the risk-neutral measure, µM t , as a function of logarithmic productivity, ln (At). The black dotted line marks the (risk-neutral) expected growth rate of At, µA. In equilibrium, all endogenous variables are functions of At, the state variable, including Nt = N (At). Therefore, the dynamics of Nt can be written as t dt + σN where both the drift µN t = µN (At) and volatility σN = σN (At) are functions of At.21 We t against Nt in Panel A of Figure 3. Doing this allows us to compare σN t of the two economies at the same stage of adoption Nt.22 Both curves start and end at zero, consistent with the S-shaped adoption dynamics in Figure 2. A key result is that the tokenized has a t . The intuition is as follows. First recall that Nt increases in At (through the transactional beneﬁt) and µP the carry cost reduction) as shown in Proposition 2. Therefore, to understand σN t , i.e., how Nt responds to shocks, we examine how At and µP t respond to shocks. Consider a negative 20Proposition B2 in Appendix B shows that ANT , the lowest value of At where N NT > 0, is below AP L. 21Proposition B3 in Appendix B solves σN for the tokenized and tokenless economies and provides an analytical characterization of how tokens aﬀect the user-base volatility. 22The adoption is either zero or full in the planner’s solution so its volatility is not economically interesting.

t < 0. The platform productivity is thus lower, reducing the transactional beneﬁt and hence Nt. How µP t responds to dZA t < 0 depends on the long-run prospect of adoption. A smaller current user base implies a greater potential of future adoption (i.e., 100%−Nt) because under the current parameter choices for our numerical solution, µA > 0 and Nt reaches 100% in the long run. Therefore, agents expect a stronger future token demand and a stronger token price appreciation (i.e., an increase of µP t ). In sum, while the decrease of At reduces Nt, the increase of µP t dampens the reduction, making Nt less responsive to the shock. This buﬀering eﬀect of µP t is absent in the tokenless economy, so its σN Panel B of Figure 3 shows that µP t declines in ln (At), which generates the previously discussed user-base stabilizing eﬀect of tokens. When At (and thus, Nt) is low, token price is expected to increase at a faster rate, reﬂecting the potential future adoption. As At and Nt grow, the pool of agents who have not adopted (i.e., 100% −Nt) shrinks so the expected We can also compare σN of the tokenized and tokenless economies over diﬀerent values of At instead of Nt. For the same level of At, as the tokenized economy has a larger Nt, it is likely to have a larger variation in Nt (i.e., a larger σN t ) than the tokenless one. Therefore, instead of comparing σN t , we compare σN t /Nt, the volatilities of user-base growth rate (i.e., dNt/Nt). Proposition B4 in Appendix B2 shows that when the two economies have the same productivity, the tokenized economy has a smaller volatility of user-base growth rate. This user-base stabilizing eﬀect also holds under µA < 0, which implies a long-run adop- tion level of 0%. When Nt declines due to the decrease of At, µP t increases and dampens the reduction of Nt because the potential of token demand (and price) to decline further (i.e., Nt −0%) is smaller. To sum up, µP t is a counter-cyclical force in the tokenized economy: it t < 0 and decreases when dZA > 0, dampening Nt’s to shocks. So far, we have only considered a constant drift of At. The user-base stabilizing eﬀect of tokens may not hold under an alternative speciﬁcation of productivity dynamics. Consider a time-varying drift of At that follows a mean-reverting process and loads on a standard

Brownian motion shock dZµA where ψ > 0. Then the Markov equilibrium shall have two state variables, At and µA Consider the scenario where the realized productivity shock is negative: dZA t < 0. As long t are positively correlated, µA t is expected to decline. Foreseeing a slower growth of productivity, user base, and token demand, agents expect a decline of µP t , and thus, become more reluctant to participant. This ampliﬁes the initial negative impact of dZA on Nt via At. Due to the lack of empirical studies on tokenized platforms’ fundamentals, our modelling of At is guided by parsimony and how the model’s adoption curve ﬁts the data (see Appendix C). Our discussion of alternative µA t speciﬁcations suggests that whether tokens amplify or dampen the response of Nt to variations of platform fundamentals sheds light on the underlying dynamics of platforms’ fundamentals. Token Price Dynamics under Endogenous User Adoption In this section, we discuss how endogenous user adoption leads to nonlinear price dynam- ics that are broadly consistent with empirical observations. The token price, P (At), and user base, N (At), are functions of platform productivity, At, the state variable. Figure 4 plots the joint dynamics of these two key observables. Token price increases sharply with adoption in the early stages, changes gradually in the intermediate stage, and speeds up again once the user base reaches a suﬃciently high level. The two price run-ups in the early and ﬁnal stages of adoption correspond to the slow user base growth in these stages relative to token price changes. Consistent with our model’s prediction, Liu and Tsyvinski (2018) ﬁnd that the value of cryptocurrencies is signiﬁcantly correlated with the growth of user networks. This ﬁgure helps us understand the cross-sectional diﬀerences in token pricing. Consider blockchain platforms categorized in term of their adoption stages: early, intermediate, and late. For two blockchain platforms in the early stage, a small diﬀerence of Nt between them can generate a very large diﬀerence in the market capitalization of tokens (PtM), as seen in

Figure 4: Token Price Dynamics over Adoption Stages. This graph plots the log token price over adoption stages, Nt (blue solid curve), and data as scattered dots. Figure 4. Essentially the same result holds in the late stage. In contrast, in the intermediate stage, even a large diﬀerence of Nt between the two platforms only yields a small diﬀerence of ln(Pt). Shams (2019) documents that user network externality is a key factor driving the cross-sectional variation in cryptocurrency price dynamics. Appnedix E provides more asset-pricing predictions. In Appendix E.1, we explore the implications of endogenous user adoption on the volatility of token price. The network eﬀects amplify the transmission of At shocks to the transactional beneﬁts of token and its price. The mechanism is related to the literature on strategic complementarity and fragility (e.g., Goldstein and Pauzner, 2005). Our analysis have so far assumed that platform productivity shock commands a constant risk premium. In Appendix E.2, we follow P´astor and Veronesi (2009) by modelling the correlation between the SDF shock and At shock as an increasing function of Nt, which captures the rising systematic risk of widely adopted platforms. The resulting Nt-dependent risk premium induces a bubble-like behavior of token price – a gradual run-up followed by an eventual decline.

Figure 5: User Subsidy vs. Token. This ﬁgure plots Nt for the tokenized economy (blue solid curve), the tokenless economy (red dotted curve), and the tokenless economy with subsidy κ = 0.5φ (green dash Subsidy as an Alternative Solution to User Adoption In this subsection, we compare tokens with a traditional alternative solution to network adoption – user subsidy (Rochet and Tirole, 2006) – and discuss the associated technical and ﬁnancial considerations that aﬀect the implementation. Let κ denote the lump-sum subsidy that the platform gives to a user for platform par- ticipation per unit of time. Given this subsidy, agent i solves the following problem at each xi,t>0 [κdt + dvi,t] where dvi,t is given in (2). Without this subsidy, this objective function is the same as (2) in the tokenless economy. By combining the subsidy κ with the participation cost φ, we can equivalently interpret introducing κ as reducing the participation cost from φ to φ −κ. Panel A of Figure 5 compares the adoption dynamics of token-based economy (the solid blue curve), the tokenless economy (the dotted red curve), and the tokenless economy with subsidy κ = 0.5φ (the dash green curve). Here we allow a suﬃciently generous subsidy that

eﬀectively reduces agents’ cost of participation by half. In this case, subsidy lifts up the adoption curve, but it is still below what tokens can achieve. Charging fees on proﬁts. One question remains: How to ﬁnance the subsidies paid to users? Subsidies are often made possible by charging fees to users. One way to introduce fees in our analysis is via a standard proportional tax, τt, which can be time-varying and state-dependent. Given τt, agent i solves the following modiﬁed problem: 0, (1 −τt) max (xi,t)1−α (NtAteui)α dt −(φ −κ)dt −xi,trdt As the fee is charged on the maximized proﬁt, introducing τt does not aﬀect agent i’s choice of xi,t and adoption decision.23 The fee charged on users, τt > 0, can be set to ﬁnance the subsidy: κdt + (xi,t)1−α (NtAteui)α dt −φdt −xi,trdt dG (ui) = κNtdt, where the left side gives the total fees collected from users and the right side is the total subsidy to users. For τi to be feasible, it has to be smaller than 100%. In the early stage where At is suﬃciently low, the τt implied by the subsidy can be greater than 100% and thus infeasible. In contrast, tokens do not have this problem. The adoption-accelerating eﬀect is active even when At is extremely low. In fact, as show by Panel B of Figure 3, the expected t , is larger when At and Nt are smaller, and thereby, the future potential of adoption, i.e., 100% −Nt, is larger. This is one advantage of tokens over subsidies. Second, implementing this tax-subsidy scheme can be more diﬃcult than tokens. Agents may not truthfully report their proﬁts from platform activities because agents’ type, ui, can be private information. Incomplete information is a classic challenge recognized by stud- ies on optimal taxation in the public ﬁnance literature (e.g., Mirrlees, 1971). Moreover, our analysis assumes that agents receive subsidy only if they participate. If agents can obtain the subsidy and fake participation, the subsidy becomes a pure outﬂow of the platform and does 23If the maximized proﬁt is positive when τt = 0, it is still positive when τt ∈(0, 1) and agent i still participates. This result resembles the standard result that a ﬁrm is neutral to proﬁt taxes.

not induce adoption. While by improving transparency, blockchain technology can poten- tially mitigate but cannot fully eliminate these frictions. Therefore, from an implementation perspective, token is a more operational mechanism to induce early adoption. Charging fees on xi,t. The platform may also directly charge fees on the value of users’ holdings of means of payment: (xi,t)1−α (NtAteui)α dt −(φ −κ)dt −xi,trdt −xi,tτtdt Here in addition to the subsidy term which eﬀectively lowers the participation cost to (φ − κ)dt, the fee, τtxi,t, eﬀectively increases the carry cost from rdt to (r + τt)dt. In addition, the platform also faces a new budget constraint: xi,tdG (ui) = κNtdt. Here τt distorts agents’ choice of xi,t. Although easier to implement, this alternative fee- subsidy is subject to the same problem we discussed earlier: it is only feasible when At is suﬃciently large. In contrast, tokens accelerate adoption across all values of At. So far we have only considered static fee-subsidy scheme. Dynamic schemes are more ﬂexible, but their applicability may be signiﬁcantly compromised by ﬁnancial constraints. An intertemporal transfer, subsidizing users in earlier stages (i.e., when At is low) and charging fees in later stages (i.e., when At is high), requires external ﬁnancing to fund early-stage subsidy. Therefore, ﬁnancial frictions may arise, due to asymmetric information on the ﬂow of fees and platform managers’ moral hazard in administrating the fee-based payouts to investors. Subsidies under incomplete information. Agents’ adoption decisions feature strategic complementarity, but given At and µP t , the assumption of monotonic hazard rate of G (u) guarantees a unique Nt > 0 in equilibrium (see Proposition 2). Once we relax this assump- tion, there can exist multiple pairs of Nt and ut that satisfy (30) and (31). To select the

equilibrium user base, one may take a global game approach (e.g., Carlsson and van Damme, 1993; Goldstein and Pauzner, 2005; Morris and Shin, 1998). For example, agents may receive noisy and correlated signals of platform productivity.24 In this case, user subsidies, by eﬀec- tively changing the participation cost, can potentially improve the coordination outcome.25 A fruitful direction of future research is to investigate how tokens and subsidies can be jointly introduced to stimulate adoption and address coordination failure. Subsidies and user-base volatility. Finally, we compare the impact of tokens and sub- sidies on the user-base volatility. In Section 5.3, we show that tokens reduce the user-base volatility. Alternatively, platforms may conduct counter-cyclical subsidies, i.e., increasing subsidies following negative shocks while decreasing subsidies following positive shocks. This is analogous to the counter-cyclical government expenditures as automatic stabilizers. How- ever, to implement such state-contingent subsidy schemes, external funds are likely to be necessary because precisely when At and the aggregate proﬁts (or tax base) on the platform are low, subsidies are high and have to be externally ﬁnanced. Therefore, the eﬀectiveness of this alternative mechanism depends on how severe the ﬁnancing frictions are. In comparison, the stabilizing eﬀect of tokens is always at work without requiring external ﬁnancing. So far, our analysis applies to both centralized and decentralized platforms. To provide a more balanced view of blockchains’ potential, we now highlight important tradeoﬀs concern- ing a salient feature of blockchains: the (relatively) decentralized nature of record-keeping. For clear illustration, we focus on a tokenless economy.26 Speciﬁcally, we generalize the agent’s ﬂow payoﬀ(condi- tional on participation) given in (8) to account for the eﬀects of decentralization and scaling 24One may assume that the productivity is observed immediately after agents make decisions on adoption and token holdings, so the model features a tractable, static form of incomplete information. 25This is analogous to government inventions that aﬀect the parameters of individuals’ decision making (e.g., Bebchuk and Goldstein, 2011). 26The tokenized economy features similar tradeoﬀs, but the endogenous time-variation of µP

dvi,t + F(Nt, xi,t; θ, ∆, ˘N)dt Here, the new term, F(Nt, xi,t; θ, ∆, ˘N), captures the agent’s preference (denoted by θ) for decentralization (denoted by ∆), as well as her disutility from congestion (which is negatively related to scalability ˘N) and from consensus delays (which is increasing in decentralization We only require F to be weakly increasing in θ and ˘N and weakly decreasing in Nt, for a given level of decentralization ∆. For illustration, we consider: F(Nt, xi,t; θ, ∆, ˘N) = θ∆−c[Nt −˘N]+ −xi,th(∆) , where h′(∆) > 0. The ﬁrst term is the agent’s additional utility ﬂow from her preference for decentralization, for example, due to the reduction of single points of failure or intermediary rent (Chen, Cong, and Xiao, 2019). The second term describes disutility from congestion when the user-base is suﬃciently large (e.g., Huberman, Leshno, and Moallemi, 2019; Easley, O’Hara, and Basu, 2019). This term captures the potential negative network eﬀect for a relatively decentralized blockchain. The last term reﬂects that a more decentralized network is more costly for an agent with a larger choice of xi,t. This is because the more decentralized a network is, the longer it takes to reach consensus (e.g., Hinzen, John, and Saleh, 2019). Conditional on participating on the platform, the agent’s optimal holdings of the medium of exchange in units of the numeraire good, xi,t, satisﬁes the ﬁrst- (1 −α)(xi,t)−α (NtAteui)α −r −h(∆) = 0 Therefore, an agent would participate if the maximized proﬁt is non-negative: −φ + θ∆−c[Nt −˘N]+ ≥0.

By following essentially the same argument in Section 3, we obtain the following equilibrium 1 −Nt = G −ln (Nt) + ln φ −θ∆+ c[Nt −˘N]+ Comparing (53) with (23), we notice the eﬀects of θ, ˘N, and h(∆). An increase in θ or ˘N weakly reduces the right side of (53), which implies that the equilibrium Nt has to weakly increase. In other words, agents’ preference for decentralization and eﬀorts to improving scalability (such as increasing block size without reducing network security) would positively impact the adoption trajectory. The eﬀect of decentralization on adoption trajectory is ambiguous because on the one hand, agents prefer decentralization, but on the other hand, an increase in decentralization might create a large enough increase in consensus delay that Designer’s problem and scale-decentralization tradeoﬀ. We recognize that it is tech- nologically infeasible or economically very expensive to achieve high decentralization and large scale at the same time. For example, to reach consensus on a decentralized/permissionless blockchain (across the nodes of the record-keeper network through costly protocols such as proof-of-work) takes time, which inevitably constrains the transaction processing scale.27 To model this tradeoﬀ, we let the designer choose a system with decentralization ∆and scalability ˘N. To do so, the designer incurs a cost C(∆, ˘N; a), which is increasing in ∆and ˘N.28 Here a measures her attribute, e.g., her skill at scaling traditional business or expertise 27As another example, to maintain a decentralized consensus system with 1,000 nodes, a traditionally centralized designer such as Facebook may get other institutions to act as record-keepers and use a Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance protocol that scale more cheaply than PoW protocols which is extremely costly in terms of energy consumption and requires the entrant to pay the nodes through large mining rewards, but would have greater diﬃculties to decentralize or to convince the users that they are decentralized, relative to entrant blockchain startups such as Ethereum. Such issues are exactly what the LIBRA project is facing. 28C(∆, ˘N; a) could be the present value of the stream of future costs of maintaining ∆and ˘N. One example is C(∆, ˘N; a) = a2∆3 + a + 3 ˘N∆, where the exponent 3 is to guarantee that the optimal ∆and ˘N for the designer are bounded above. In fact, we could equivalently specify that the designer faces a constraint that pins down the production possibility frontier, such as H(∆, ˘N; a) = B −C(∆, ˘N; a), where B can be viewed as a total budget or labor to be allocated to develop decentralization and scalability and C(∆, ˘N; a) would correspond to the cost. The analysis is similar and the comparative statics we care about remain the same.

at decentralization technology. For example, Visa. Inc is very eﬃcient at conducting large- scale business transactions (large a) whereas Ethereum is known for well-designed consensus protocols which attract users who value decentralization (small a). Naturally, their diﬀerent attributes lead to diﬀerent choices of scalability and decentralization. Speciﬁcally, the designer chooses the optimal ˘N ∗and ∆∗which maximize the following: euidi −φ + θ∆−c[Nt −˘N]+ dt−C(∆, ˘N; a), (54) where the ﬁrst term is the present value of aggregate transaction surplus (see, (39) and (40)), and the last term reﬂects the designer’s cost. In practice, the marginal cost of increasing the scalability/capacity ˘N, ∂C N , is lower for a more reputable traditional designer (higher value of the attribute a in our convention, think about VISA). In other words, N < 0. Similarly, the marginal cost of increasing the ∂∆, is lower for an entrant with greater expertise at designing decentral- ized protocols (lower value of the attribute a in our convention, think about Ethereum). In ∂a∂∆> 0. Moreover, current technology dictates that it is more costly to scale business on a decentralized system than on a centralized system Concerning the ideal scale-decentralization choice, we ﬁrst note that (54) exhibits nega- tive cross-partial in a and ∆, positive cross-partial in a and ˘N, and weakly negative cross partial in ˘N and ∆. Applying monotone comparative statics results, e.g., Theorem 4.1 in Athey, Milgrom, and Roberts (1998), we conclude that the designer’s optimal ∆∗is de- creasing in a while the optimal ˘N ∗is increasing in a. In other words, a more reputable traditional designer (bigger a) optimally implements a system that is bigger in scale but less 29More generally, to capture these observations, we can assume that C has strictly increasing diﬀerences in a and ∆, strictly decreasing diﬀerences in a and ˘N, and increasing diﬀerences in ˘N and ∆.

We provide a tractable dynamic equilibrium model of token pricing and platform adop- tion. Platforms create value by supporting speciﬁc economic activities and platform tokens derive value by enabling transactions among heterogeneous users. As a result, token value reﬂects users’ endogenous participation and the associated network externality eﬀects. En- dogenous user base also plays a critical role in explaining the cross-section variation of token pricing, the dynamics of token price volatility, and the run-up and crash of token prices. By comparing platforms with and without tokens, we show that introducing tokens low- ers the eﬀective carry cost of conducting platform transactions and hence accelerates the adoption of productive platforms. Introducing tokens also reduces the volatility of user base because agents’ expectation of long-term growth in token value weakens the impact of temporary productivity shocks on the user base. A key assumption in our model is that the token market is fully liquid. However, the token market may be illiquid especially at early stages of platform adoption. We leave in- corporating token market illiquidity into our model for future research. Another interesting extension of our model is to combine our analysis of user activities with the design of plat- form infrastructure (e.g., blockchain protocol design in Fanti, Kogan, and Viswanath, 2019). Finally, tokens may inﬂuence platform competition as users compare platforms in both their current productivities and the eﬀective carry costs of conducting transactions.

Alvarez, Fernando, and Francesco Lippi, 2013, The demand of liquid assets with uncertain lumpy expenditures, Journal of Monetary Economics 60, 753 – 770. Manuscript, Department of Economics, Harvard University http://kuznets. fas. harvard. edu/˜ Athey, Susan, Ivo Parashkevov, Vishnu Sarukkai, and Jing Xia, 2016, Bitcoin pricing, adoption, and usage: Theory and evidence, Working Paper. Balvers, Ronald J, and Bill McDonald, 2017, Designing a global digital currency, Working Paper. Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon, 1983, A positive theory of monetary policy in a natural rate model, Journal of Political Economy 91, 589–610. Baumol, William J., 1952, The transactions demand for cash: An inventory theoretic approach, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 66, 545–556. Bebchuk, Lucian A, and Itay Goldstein, 2011, Self-fulﬁlling credit market freezes, Review of Fi- nancial Studies 24, 3519–3555. Biais, Bruno, Christophe Bisiere, Matthieu Bouvard, and Catherine Casamatta, 2019, The blockchain folk theorem, The Review of Financial Studies 32, 1662–1715. Biais, Bruno, Christophe Bisi`ere, Matthieu Bouvard, Catherine Casamatta, and Albert Menkveld, 2018, Equilibrium Bitcoin pricing, Working paper Toulouse School of Economics. Bolton, Patrick, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang, 2011, A uniﬁed theory of tobin’s q, corporate invest- ment, ﬁnancing, and risk management, The Journal of Finance 66, 1545–1578. Bond, Philip, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein, 2012, The real eﬀects of ﬁnancial markets, Annual Review of Financial Economics 4, 339–360. Brunnermeier, Markus K, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A macroeconomic model with a ﬁnancial sector, American Economic Review 104, 379–421. Campbell, John Y., 2017, Financial Decisions and Markets: A Course in Asset Pricing (Princeton Carlsson, Hans, and Eric van Damme, 1993, Global games and equilibrium selection, Econometrica Catalini, Christian, and Joshua S Gans, 2018, Initial coin oﬀerings and the value of crypto tokens, Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research. Chen, Long, Lin William Cong, and Yizhou Xiao, 2019, A brief introduction to blockchain eco- Chiu, Jonathan, and Thorsten V Koeppl, 2017, The economics of cryptocurrencies–Bitcoin and Chod, Jiri, and Evgeny Lyandres, 2018, A theory of ICOs: Diversiﬁcation, agency, and asymmetric information, Working paper Boston University Questrom School of Business. Christiano, LawrenceJ., Martin Eichenbaum, and CharlesL. Evans, 2005, Nominal rigidities and the dynamic eﬀects of a shock to monetary policy, Journal of Political Economy 113, 1–45. Cochrane, John H., 2018, The Bitcoin market isn’t irrational, Chicago Booth Review.

Cong, Lin William, and Zhiguo He, 2018, Blockchain disruption and smart contracts, Forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies. , and Jiasun Li, 2018, Decentralized mining in centralized pools, Working Paper. D´ecamps, Jean-Paul, Thomas Mariotti, Jean-Charles Rochet, and St´ephane Villeneuve, 2011, Free cash ﬂow, issuance costs, and stock prices, The Journal of Finance 66, 1501–1544. Duﬃe, Darrell, 1990, Chapter 3 money in general equilibrium theory, Handbook of Monetary Eco- , 2001, Dynamic Asset Pricing Theory (Princeton university Press). Easley, David, Maureen O’Hara, and Soumya Basu, 2019, From mining to markets: The evolution of Bitcoin transaction fees, Journal of Financial Economics. Fanti, Giulia, Leonid Kogan, and Pramod Viswanath, 2019, Economics of proof-of-stake payment Feenstra, Robert C., 1986, Functional equivalence between liquidity costs and the utility of money, Journal of Monetary Economics 17, 271 – 291. Freeman, Scott, and Finn E. Kydland, 2000, Monetary aggregates and output, American Economic Gal´ı, Jordi, 2015, Monetary Policy, Inﬂation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework and Its Applications Second edition . No. 10495 in Economics Books Garratt, Rodney, and Neil Wallace, 2018, Bitcoin 1, Bitcoin 2,....: An experiment in privately issued outside monies, Economic Inquiry 56, 1887–1897. Goldstein, Itay, Deeksha Gupta, and Ruslan Sverchkov, 2019, Initial coin oﬀerings as a commitment to competition, Discussion paper, Carnegie Mellon University and University of Pennsylvania The Goldstein, Itay, and Ady Pauzner, 2005, Demand–deposit contracts and the probability of bank runs, the Journal of Finance 60, 1293–1327. Griﬃn, John M, and Amin Shams, 2018, Is Bitcoin really un-tethered?, Working Paper. Harrison, J Michael, and David M Kreps, 1978, Speculative investor behavior in a stock market with heterogeneous expectations, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 92, 323–336. He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2011, A Model of Capital and Crises, The Review of Economic Studies 79, 735–777. , 2013, Intermediary asset pricing, American Economic Review 103, 732–70. Hinzen, Franz J, Kose John, and Fahad Saleh, 2019, Proof-of-works limited adoption problem, NYU Stern School of Business. Hu, Albert, Christine Parlour, and Uday Rajan, 2018, Cryptocurrencies: Stylized facts on a new investible instrument, Working paper University of California Berkeley. Huberman, Gur, Jacob D Leshno, and Ciamac C Moallemi, 2019, An economic analysis of the Bitcoin payment system, . Jackson, Lloyd K, 1968, Subfunctions and second-order ordinary diﬀerential inequalities, Advances in Mathematics 2, 307–363. Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, The aggregate demand for treasury debt, Journal of Political Economy 120, 233–267.

Li, Jiasun, and William Mann, 2018, Initial coin oﬀering and platform building, Working Paper. Li, Ye, 2017, Procyclical ﬁnance: The money view, Dice center working paper, The Ohio State University Fisher College of Business. Liu, Yukun, and Aleh Tsyvinski, 2018, Risks and returns of cryptocurrency, Working Paper 24877 National Bureau of Economic Research. , and Xi Wu, 2019, Common risk factors in cryptocurrency, Working Paper 25882 National Bureau of Economic Research. Ljungqvist, Lars, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2004, Recursive Macroeconomic Theory, 2nd Edition . vol. 1 of MIT Press Books (The MIT Press). Lucas, Robert E., and Juan Pablo Nicolini, 2015, On the stability of money demand, Journal of Monetary Economics 73, 48 – 65. Mirrlees, J. A., 1971, An exploration in the theory of optimum income taxation, The Review of Economic Studies 38, 175–208. Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin, 1998, Unique equilibrium in a model of self-fulﬁlling currency attacks, The American Economic Review 88, 587–597. Nagel, Stefan, 2016, The Liquidity Premium of Near-Money Assets, The Quarterly Journal of Pagnotta, Emiliano, and Andrea Buraschi, 2018, An equilibrium valuation of Bitcoin and decen- tralized network assets, Working paper Imperial College. P´astor, Lubo˘s, and Pietro Veronesi, 2009, Technological revolutions and stock prices, The American Economic Review 99, 1451–1483. Pissarides, Christopher A, 2000, Equilibrium unemployment theory (MIT press). Poterba, James M, and Julio J Rotemberg, 1986, Money in the utility function: An empirical implementation, Working Paper 1796 National Bureau of Economic Research. Raskin, Max, and David Yermack, 2016, Digital currencies, decentralized ledgers, and the future of central banking, Working Paper 22238 National Bureau of Economic Research. Rochet, Jean-Charles, and Jean Tirole, 2006, Two-sided markets: A progress report, The RAND Journal of Economics 37, 645–667. Saleh, Fahad, 2017, Blockchain without waste: Proof-of-stake, working paper, New York University. Scheinkman, Jos´e. A., and Wei Xiong, 2003, Overconﬁdence and speculative bubbles, Journal of Political Economy 111, 1183–1220. Schilling, Linda, and Harald Uhlig, 2018, Some simple Bitcoin economics, Discussion paper, Na- tional Bureau of Economic Research. Shaﬁr, Eldar, Peter Diamond, and Amos Tversky, 1997, Money Illusion, The Quarterly Journal of Shams, Amin, 2019, What drives the covariation of cryptocurrency returns?, Working paper The University of Texas at Austin. Shiller, Robert J, 1981, Do stock prices move too much to be justiﬁed by subsequent changes in dividends?, The American Economic Review 71, 421–436. Sockin, Michael, and Wei Xiong, 2018, A model of cryptocurrencies, Working Paper. Tobin, James, 1956, The interest-elasticity of transactions demand for cash, The Review of Eco- nomics and Statistics 38, 241–247. Walsh, Carl E., 2003, Monetary Theory and Policy, 2nd Edition (The MIT Press).

Appendix A – Transaction Surplus and Flow Utility In this section, we provide theoretical foundations for our speciﬁcation of platform trans- action surplus in (2). We ﬁrst present a general model based on transaction costs that applies to all platform tokens (not necessarily blockchain-based), which essentially captures a form of convenience yield (see, e.g., Cochrane, 2018), and then discuss a case that is speciﬁc to blockchain platform. Our goal here is not to microfound every application scenario, but to illustrate practical settings that motivate our speciﬁcation. A model of convenience yield. Agents have investment opportunities that occur at Poisson arrival times, {Tn}+∞ n=1, with time-varying and agent-speciﬁc intensity, λi,t. At a given Poisson time, Tn, agent i is endowed with a technology, ωiF (·), that transforms labor into goods, and is matched with another agent who can supply the required labor input. Agent-speciﬁc productivity is captured by ωi. To simplify the exposition, we assume that the labor supply has a constant marginal cost of one, and the supplier breaks even, so the full trade surplus is enjoyed by agent i. This setup of uncertain lumpy transactions follows the Baumol-Tobin model of Alvarez and Lippi (2013). Agent i’s labor demand, denoted by h, is not restricted by the real balance of token holdings, Ptki,Tn−, where ki,Tn−denotes the units of tokens carried to Tn and we make token price explicit in the expression because we want to start with microfounding the utility ﬂow in a tokenized economy. Since the focus of this paper is not on ﬁnancial constraints, we allow the agent to borrow dollars (an instantaneous loan) at zero cost, so h may exceed agent i’s wealth at the moment. The production is done immediately, and the loan is repaid immediately by the goods. So, given a competitive credit market, the loan rate is zero. The lumpy payment for labor incurs a transaction cost that is proportional to the total payment value, δh (δ > 0), but using tokens as means of payment save the transaction cost by U (Ptki,Tn−) (U ′ > 0, U ′′ < 0) because agent i does not need to exchange dollars for tokens, the required means of payment on the platform. Agent i maximizes the investment proﬁt, which is a jump in wealth, ωiF (h) −h −(δh −U (Ptki,Tn−)) , where the last term is the transaction cost. The optimal labor demand, h∗, is given by ωiF ′ (h∗) = 1 + δ,

so the marginal value of production is equal to the marginal cost of labor plus the transaction cost, δ. We can substitute the constant h∗into the investment proﬁt to have ωiF (h∗) −(1 + δ) h∗+ U (Ptki,Tn−) . We assume that ωi is suﬃciently high so h∗≥Ptki,Tn−. The conversion between the local currency (token) and other assets can be costly, especially when a lumpy transaction is required within a short period of time. By holding tokens, agents save such costs. Linking transaction costs to the monetary value of assets has a long tradition in economics (Baumol, 1952; Tobin, 1956; Duﬃe, 1990). Therefore, at time t, agent i has an expected gain of λi,tU (Ptki,t) dt by holdings ki,t units of tokens for dt. To obtain a tighter analytical characterization of the equilibrium, we specify λi,t = (NtAteui)α, α ∈(0, 1). A larger community (Nt) makes it easier to ﬁnd transaction counterparties. A higher platform quality (At) reﬂects a more eﬃcient matching mechanism or the fact that the economic transactions supported by the platform are more popular. And ui captures agent-speciﬁc transaction needs. We specify U (Ptki,t) = χ (Ptki,t)1−α, so the expected transaction costs saved are λi,tU (Ptki,t) dt = (NtAteui)α (Ptki,t)1−α χdt. In the following we set χ = 1 because its scaling eﬀect can be subsumed by the level of At. We may reinterpret h as goods or services other than labor, and the investment proﬁt as a burst of consumption or utility value from transactions. The foundation of this speciﬁcation of trade surplus is two-fold: (1) the arrival of transaction opportunities depends on the user base, the platform quality, and agent-speciﬁc factors; (2) holding tokens on the tokenized platform save transaction costs for lumpy payments. Note that the same setup can also generate the trade surplus for a tokenless economy where transaction is settled using the numeraire good, so in the main text, we assume the same functional form of transaction surplus. In a tokenless economy, agents hold assets that yield a risk-adjusted return of r and dollars worth of xi,t. The transaction cost, δh, is thus the cost of immediately exchanging a lumpy chuck of assets for cash. Holding cash saves this cost by U (xi,t). If external ﬁnancing is required, the per unit cost of transaction, δ, also captures the diﬃculty to raise funds in lumpy amounts. The concavity of U (·) can be motivated by models of cash holdings that recognize cash carry costs and external ﬁnancial

constraints (e.g., Bolton, Chen, and Wang, 2011). While the above transaction-cost based model applies to platform tokens that serve as means of payment, we next give another theoretical foundation to illustrate: (i) although we focus on tokens that serve explicitly as means of payment on platforms, our theory applies more generally to all tokens that provide users utilities speciﬁc to the underly- ing platform technology; (ii) blockchain-based platforms provide novel forms of transaction surplus from holding tokens on platforms and further motivate our speciﬁcation of token Many blockchain-based platforms feature users providing service to peers to make a proﬁt. For example, Filecoin, Golem, Storj, Elastic, etc., all have “storage miners” who help clients store digital ﬁles for a proﬁt paid in native tokens. Oftentimes, storage miners have to “stake” native tokens (i.e., post it as collateral) in order to win the chance to service clients. In fact, staking is a common practice on blockchain platforms to encourage value- creating activities among their users. It goes beyond validating transactions and producing blocks within consensus mechanisms such as Proof-of-Stake (POS) and Distributed Proof- of-Stake (DPOS). In general, holding/staking tokens may enable network participants to potentially receive access to exclusive features of the platform, partake of business activities, or receive status recognition. For example, OmiseGO (OMG), the ﬁrst ERC20 tokens on Ethereum sold via an ICO to reach unicorn status (US$1 billion market cap) in August 2017 (coinmarketcap.com), has validators deposit OMGs in staking contracts to validate transactions. OmiseGo selects the validator based on who has staked the highest token to validate the transaction and it performs the task. Depending on the performance of the validator, the validator will either receive rewards or penalties. Filecoin, VentureFusion, Numerai, etc., all feature some forms of staking. Now suppose a storage miner on the platform has a realized storage space euiα, and is waiting to be matched with clients demanding decentralized storage (similar to a labor- market search-and-matching scenario). Potential client demand (analogous to the number of job seekers) is proportional to Nt, the user base of the platform, whereas the matching eﬀort of the storage miner is proportional to staking amount xi (similar to job vacancies). Then if the platform has a matching eﬃciency of Aα, a matching function with constant return to scale (e.g., Pissarides, 2000) would yield the storage miner a payoﬀof t (Ptki,t)1−α = (Ptki,t)1−α(ANteui)α,

which exactly gives the surplus ﬂow in (2). The storage miner then takes back the same number of tokens staked after providing the service for dt. In the case above, it is crucial that a service provider (storage miner in the case of Filecoin) needs to stake/hold native tokens to have a chance of being matched with a customer. If she can match with a customer and instantaneously exchange tokens for the numeraire good, the the velocity of native tokens can be inﬁnite, resulting in price indeterminacy. While our focus is on a majority of tokens whose value derives from the productivity of underlying platforms and user network eﬀects, we acknowledge that in reality, there exists a variety of tokens that serve purposes other than facilitating platform-speciﬁc transactions. Digital currencies developed by central banks serve general payment purposes. They are typically not tied to speciﬁc user networks, and their adoption is driven by policy and legal decisions. There are also tokens that enable the sharing of future corporate revenues or the distribution of products and services. Such security tokens can be valued using traditional discounted cash-ﬂow models, and are therefore not our focus. Moreover, our model does not capture the more complex interdependence of platforms For example, Litecoin and Dogecoin are “altcoins” — variants of the original open-sourced Bitcoin protocol to enable new features. Therefore, the productivity of their platforms inherits signiﬁcantly from that of the Bitcoin blockchain. Other examples include the “AppCoins,” what entrepreneurs often sell through the initial coin oﬀerings (ICOs), that are developed for speciﬁc applications (e.g., Gnosis and Golem) and are built on existing blockchain infrastructures (e.g., Ethereum or Waves).

Appendix B - Proofs Lemma B1. Given µP t and a suﬃciently high productivity, i.e., At > A a unique non-degenerate solution, Nt > 0, and ut > U for (30) and (31) if G (u) has an increasing hazard rate. The user base, Nt, increases in µP t and At. Agent i participates when ui ≥ut. Conditional on participating, the numeraire value of agent i’s optimal token i,t, is given by (28), and increases in At and µP Proof of Lemma B1. (30) and (31) jointly determine the user base Nt given At and µP First, we note that Nt = 0 is always a solution. Here we focus on the non-degenerate case, i.e., Nt > 0. Fixing At and µP t , we consider a response function R hypothetical value of Nt, say n, to the measure of agents who choose to participate after knowing Nt = n: −ln (n) + ln Before we start, for any At = A > 0, we deﬁne the value of its response function at n = 0: = 0. This is consistent with that given a zero user base, each agent derives zero transaction surplus from token holdings and chooses not to participate. = 0, so the response function is continuous in n. As depicted in Figure 6, the response curve originates from zero (the degenerate case). First, we show that given µP t , there exists a A such that for At = A > A, its corresponding −ln (n) + ln crosses the 45o line at least once in (0, 1], and for any value of At = A < A, the response curve never crosses the 45o line in (0, 1]. Later in our numerical solution, we verify that this inequality holds at all values of At. Given µP t , we deﬁne a mapping, A(n), from any equilibrium, with non-zero value of user base, n ∈(0, 1], to the corresponding value of At,

Figure 6: Determining User Base. This graph shows the aggregate response of users’ adoption decision, , to diﬀerent levels of Nt = n ∈[0, 1], given At and µP i.e., the unique solution to −ln (n) + ln This mapping is a continuous mapping on a bounded domain ⊆(0, 1]. Then by the Least- Upper-Bound-Property of real numbers, the image set of this mapping, {A(n), n ∈(0, 1)}, has an inﬁmum, which we denote by A. Now, for At = A, consider a n (A) ∈(0, 1] such that (63) holds. For any A > A, the LHS of (63) is higher than the RHS, i.e., R n (A) ; A, µP n (A), so that the response curve of At = A is above the 45o line at n (A). Next, because the is continuous in n and R ≤1 by deﬁnition in (62), i.e., it eventually falls to or below the 45o line as n increases, there must exist a n (A) ∈(0, 1] such that when at At = A, (63) holds by the Intermediate Value Theorem. Therefore, we have proved that for any At = A > A, there exists a non-zero user base. Throughout the proof, we ﬁx µP t , so A is a function of µP After proving the existence of Nt > 0 for At ∈[A, +∞), we prove the uniqueness given the increasing hazard rate of g (u) (i.e., 1−G(u) increase in u).30 Speciﬁcally, we show that , the response curve crosses the 45o line exactly once (and from above) when At ∈[A, +∞). First note that R −n has either a positive derivative or a negative 30The hazard rate is increasing if and only if 1 −G(u) is log-concave. This assumption is common in the theory literature, for example, to avoid the complicated “ironing” of virtual values.

derivative at n = 0. If it has positive derivative (i.e., the response curve shoots over the 45o line), then at n′, the ﬁrst time the response curve crosses the 45o line again, the derivative −n must be weakly negative at n′, i.e., the response curve crosses the 45o Now suppose the response curve crosses the 45o line for the second time from below at ′′ > n′, so the derivative of R −n at n′′ must be weakly positive, and is equal to 1 −G (u (n′′; At, µP 1 −G (u (n′; At, µP where the ﬁrst inequality comes from the increasing hazard rate and the fact that u is decreasing in n for n ∈(0, 1], and the second inequality follows from (64) and the fact that the response curve crosses the 45o line at n′ (i.e., n′ = R This contradicts the presumption that the response curve reaches the 45o line from below (and the derivative of R −n is weakly positive). Therefore, we conclude that for At ∈[A, +∞), there exists a unique adoption level n. Now if R derivative at n = 0, then in the previous argument, we can replace n′ with 0 and show that there does not exist another intersection between the response curve and the 45o line beyond n = 0. Therefore, only if R −n has positive derivative at n = 0, do we have a positive (non-degenerate) adoption level. Finally, we prove that Nt increases in µP t . Consider ˜µP t . Suppose the contrary that their corresponding adoption levels satisfy ˜Nt ≤Nt. Because we have proved that the response curve only crosses the 45o line only once and from above, given Nt, we have −ln (n) + ln ∀n ∈(0, Nt] .

We know that by deﬁnition, where the ﬁrst inequality uses ˜µP t and the second inequality uses the fact that ˜Nt ∈ (0, Nt] and the inequality (66). This contradiction implies that the adoption level Nt has to be increasing in µP t . Because ut decrease in both µP t and At. The same method proves that the adoption level Nt increases in At. Proof of Proposition 1. t to zero, we can apply Lemma B1 to the tokenless economy, and obtain the following the results: (i) (22) and (23) solve a unique pair of N NT as functions of At; (ii) the adoption level N NT Proof of Proposition 2. We apply Lemma B1 to the tokenized economy, and obtain the following the results: (i) (30) and (31) solve a unique pair of Nt and ut as functions of At t ; (ii) the adoption level Nt (the participation threshold, ut) increases (decreases) in t . Next we show that (32) implies a second-order ordinary diﬀerential equation for the token price, Pt = P (At). Because ut decreases in µP t , the right side of (32) is monotonic (increasing) in µP given At and Pt, (32) uniquely solves µP t . This means µP t can be expressed as a function of Pt and At, denoted by µP t = H (At, Pt). Note that by applying Itˆo’s lemma, we have t = P ′(At) AtσA2. Therefore, (32) implies an ordinary diﬀerential equation: P (At) AtµA + 1 AtσA2 = H (At, Pt) . Given the boundary conditions (35) and (38), this ODE satisﬁes the regularity conditions in Theorems 4.17 and 4.18 in Jackson (1968), so the solution exists and is unique. In the following, we summarize the steps of solving the token pricing ODE. First, the user-type cutoﬀthreshold ut and the user base Nt jointly solve (30) and (31). Moreover, we deﬁne the aggregate of agents’ type in (33), which only depends on ut. All three variables,

Figure 7: Endogenous Variables as Functions of the State Variable. ut, Nt, and St, can be expressed as functions of At and µP Second, the token-market clearing condition, (32), only contains Pt, At, and µP Nt and St increase in At and µP t (as previously discussed), the right side of (32) is monotonic t , so (32) implies a unique value of µP t given the values of At and Pt. Third, because in equilibrium, the token price is a function of At, we can apply Itˆo’s t = P ′(At) P(At) AtµA + 1 AtσA2. (32) then implies a mapping from At, P (At), and P ′ (At) to P ′′ (At), i.e., a second-order ODE of P (At). Augmenting the ODE with the boundary conditions (35) and (38), we can solve the token price function P (At). Finally, once we have solved P (At), we can apply Itˆo’s lemma again to solve µP function of At, and then using (30) and (31) to solve Nt and ut (and thus St) as functions of At. Figure 7 plots the complete solution of the model that includes all the endogenous variables as functions of At, the state variable of the Markov equilibrium.

Proposition B1. The token price is positive in the Markov equilibrium in Propsition 2. Proof of Proposition B1. We prove this proposition by contradiction. The token-market clearing condition implies the aggregate token demand, M = ui≥ut ki,tdi > 0. Consider a value of At such that P (At) = 0. Agent i chooses the units of tokens (Ptki,t)1−α (NtAteui)α dt −φdt −Ptki,trdt + ki,tEt [dPt] Given that Pt = 0, the ﬁrst term of transactional beneﬁt is zero, so for k∗ i,t to be a ﬁnite number, agent i must be indiﬀerent between the marginal beneﬁt from the expected token price change, Et [dPt], and the marginal cost of losing interests Ptrdt. Since the latter is zero, the former must be zero Et [dPt] = 0. As a result, the maximized proﬁt is −φ < 0 for all agents, and no agent chooses to participate, resuting in a zero aggregate token demand that violates the token market-clearing condtion. Proposition B2. Deﬁne ANT ≡min At : N NT (At) > 0 . We have APL < ANT. Proof of Proposition B2. To prove this inequality, consider the agent whose type is uNT, i.e., the type whose ﬂow proﬁt is equal to zero when At = ANT in the tokenless economy. Therefore, we have the following 0 = N NTANTeuNT α uNT euNT dG (u) + uNT eudG (u) + Recall that in the planner’s solution, we have: By comparing the right sides in the two preceding inequalities, we conclude ANT > APL.

Proposition B3 (Comparing User-Base Volatilities over Adoption Stages). The user-base volatility of the tokenless economy is The user-base volatility of the tokenized economy is 1 −g (ut) /Nt is the diﬀusion of µP t as deﬁned below: t dt + σµP Under the same level of adoption, i.e., Nt = N NT , the user-base volatility of the tokenized economy is smaller than that of the tokenless economy if and only if µP decreases in At. Proof of Proposition B3. Without loss of generality, we write the dynamics of Nt as: t dt + ˜σN t Nt = σN t is a more convenient notation to work with for the derivations. First, we solve the user-base volatility without token. Using Itˆo’s lemma, we can diﬀer- entiate (23) and then, by matching coeﬃcients with (42), derive µN is the quadratic variation of duNT . Using Itˆo’s lemma, we diﬀerentiate 2 + µA −

Substituting this dynamics into (77), we have: 2 + µA − By matching coeﬃcients on dZA t with (42), we can solve for σN Next, we solve the user-base volatility in the tokenized economy where Nt depends on the expected token price appreciation µP t that is a univariate function of At. In equilibrium, its law of motion is given by a diﬀusion process t dt + σµP Now, the dynamics of ut becomes t denote the diﬀusion of ut. By collecting the coeﬃcients on dZA t in (81), we have: which, in comparison with (78), contains an extra term that reﬂects the volatility of expected token price change. Note that, similar to (77), we have: dNt = −g (ut) dut −1 2g′ (ut) ⟨dut, dut⟩, so the diﬀusion of Nt is −g (ut) σu t . Matching it with the conjectured diﬀusion coeﬃcient σN Under the same level of adoption, i.e., Nt = N NT , we also have ut = uNT , so the ﬁrst brackets in (73) and (74) have the same value. Therefore, the only diﬀerence between the two curves of user-base volatility arises from σµP t , the volatility of expected token price change. By Itˆo’s lemma, σµP dAt σAAt, so the sign of σµP depends on whether µP

decreases in At. When µP t decrease in At, σµP < 0, and thereby, the tokenized economy has a smaller user-base volatility than the tokenless economy. Proposition B4 (Comparing the Volatilities of User-Base Growth Rates). For any given At, the volatility of user-base growth in the tokenized economy is smaller than that of the tokenless economy if µP t > 0 and µP t decreases in At. Proof of Proposition B4. From the proof of Proposition B3, we know that in the token- less economy, the volatility of user-base growth rate, dNt/Nt, is and similarly, in the tokenized economy, 1 −G (ut) −g (ut) Under the assumption of a weakly monotone hazard rate (introduced in Proposition 2), is weakly increasing in ut, so is t > 0, a tokenized platform has ut < uNT 1 −G (ut) −g (ut) t decreases in At, by Itˆo’s lemma, σµP dAt σAAt < 0, and thereby, Consequently, the volatility of user-base growth rate of the tokenized platform is smaller than that of the tokenless economy for any given At.

Appendix C - Parameter Choices We choose the model parameters under the physical measure so that the model generates patterns that are broadly consistent with user adoption and token price dynamics. Recall from Section 2.1 that under the widely-used SDF, = −rdt −ηd bZΛ At under the physical measure follows a GBM process, where the drift coeﬃcient, bµA, is equal to µA + ηρσA and the volatility coeﬃcient is σA. We use token price and blockchain user-base dynamics from July 2010 and April 2018. We normalize one unit of time in the model to be one year. Since we ﬁx the token supply at M, the token price Pt completely drives the market capitalization (PtM). We map Pt to the aggregate market capitalization of major cryptocurrencies.31 Since we study a representative token economy, focusing on the aggregate market averages out idiosyncratic movements due to speciﬁcalities of token protocols. We collect the number of active user addresses for these cryptocurrencies and map the aggregate number to Nt. We map the data to early stage of adoption in the model (i.e., Nt ≤0.5). We normalize the maximum number of active addresses (in December 2017) to Nt = 0.5 and scale the number of addresses in other months by that of December 2017. For each month, we also need a value of ln (At). Since we cannot observe the platform quality, we assign December 2017 the value of ln (At) in our model that corresponds to Nt = 0.5. With December 2017 as a reference point, we calculate the values of ln (At) for other months by applying forward and backward the expected growth rate of At under the physical measure. As a result, we focus on the stage of adoption, i.e., Nt ∈[N, 0.5], where N = 0.0001. Next, we choose parameter values such that the model generates data patterns in Figures 2 and 4. We set the annual risk-free rate, r, to 5% and choose µA = 2% < r to satisfy the no-arbitage restriction. As we have previously discussed, we interpret At as a process that broadly captures technological advances, regulatory changes, and the variety of activities 31We include all sixteen cryptocurrencies with complete market cap and active address information on bit- infocharts.com: AUR (Auroracoin), BCH (Bitcoin Cash), BLK (BlackCoin), BTC (Bitcoin), BTG (Bitcoin Gold), DASH (Dashcoin), DOGE (DOGEcoin), ETC (Ethereum Classic), ETH (Ethereum), FTC (Feath- ercoin), LTC (Litecoin), NMC (Namecoin), NVC (Novacoin), PPC (Peercoin), RDD (Reddcoin), VTC (Vertcoin). They represent more than 2/3 of the entire crypto market.

feasible on the platform, all of which suggest a fast and volatile growth of At. This con- sideration motivates us to choose σA = 200%. In Appendix C2, we conduct comparative statics for µA and σA. As shown in Figure 11, the model does generate a close link between the technology volatility and that of token returns, likely to due the fact that we focus on fundamental aspects of adoption and valuation while do not fully capture the behavioral and, in general, speculative factors in the model. That said, our choice of σA = 200% leads to a token return volatility that is close to the median cryptocurrency’s return volatility in Hu, Parlour, and Rajan (2018). They document that the median cryptocurrency’s daily return volatility is 14.6%, which is annualized to 232%. This choice of σA = 200% gives us both a high volatility for At but also much of the growth for At under the physical measure, as the physical-measure drift of At is bµA = µA + ηρσA (Girsanov’s theorem). To match the growth of Nt in the data, we set ηρ = 1, so that bµA = 202% using the preceding equation. As a result, the user base Nt grows from N = 0.0001 to 0.5 during the eight-year period of our data sample and the growth rate for the model-implied Nt matches that in data. One way to generate ηρ = 1 is to set η to 1.5, which is roughly the Sharpe ratio of ex-post eﬃcient portfolio in the U.S. stock market (combining various factors) and ρ to 0.67, a sensible choice of betas for the technology sector (P´astor and Veronesi, 2009). By no arbitrage, the drift of At, µA, is smaller than r under the risk-neutral measure, because after full adoption, µP t = µA as implied by the boundary condition. Therefore, for the model to generate the high growth of user base in data, we need the drift of At to be high under the physical measure, which requires, ﬁrst, a high volatility of At and, second, a high enough ηρ. Setting ρ to 0.67 seems at odd with the existing studies on the returns of cryptocurrencies that show their correlations with the returns of traditional assets and macroeconomic factors are low (Hu, Parlour, and Rajan, 2018; Liu and Tsyvinski, 2018). However, we argue that in our model, dZA t captures the shocks to the underlying technology or platform quality instead of direct return shocks. Moreover, the returns of cryptocurrencies can be driven by factors outside of our model, and such factors can add noise orthogonal to the SDF and reduce the correlation between cryptocurrency returns and the SDF. We use the normalized distribution for ui by truncating the Normal density function 2θ2 within six-sigma on both sides. As the dispersion of ui determines how responsive Nt is to the change of At, we match the curvature of Nt with respect to At by setting θ = 10/ 2, which implies that thee cross-section variance of ui is 50. Note that what drives agents’ adoption and token holding decisions is eui. A normal distribution of

Figure 8: Comparative Statics – Risk-Adjusted Productivity Growth µA. Panel A plots the ratio of token price to productivity, Pt/At, against the user base, Nt, under diﬀerent values of µA. Panel B plots the user base, Nt, against the logarithmic productivity, ln (At), under diﬀerent values of σA. The values of the other parameters are set according to Appendix C1. ui implies a log-normal distribution of eui that features a concentrated mass in the range of low ui and a heavy right tail. Our choice of this distribution is guided by data. In Appendix C2, we compare the adoption curve implied by the normal distribution of ui and that from a uniform distribution, and show that the normal distribution generates an adoption curve that ﬁts data better. We set α to 0.3 so that the senstivity of ln(Pt) with repect to Nt matches the data in the region where Nt ∈[N, 0.5] as we show in Figure 4. The remaining parameters quantitatively do not aﬀect much the equilibrium dynamics. We set the participation cost, φ, to one and normalize M to 10 billion. features monetary neutrality, Pt is halved when M is doubled but importantly the equilibrium We conduct comparative static analysis for µA, σA, and G (u). We report in the following that the qualitative results are robust to the choices of µA and σ. The normal distribution of agents’ type, ui, is guided by data. Agents’ transaction need, i.e., what drives token demand, is eui, which follows a log-normal distribution featuring heavy tail. desirability of using a normal distribution of ui, we also report the model-implied adoption curve from a uniform distribution of ui, and show that it fails to match data.

Figure 9: Comparative Statics – Productivity Volatility σA. Panel A plots the user base, Nt, against the logarithmic productivity, ln (At), under diﬀerent values of σA. Panel B plots the expected token return under the risk-neutral measure, µP t , against the logarithmic productivity, ln (At), under diﬀerent values of σA. Panel C plots the token price, Pt, against the productivity, At, under diﬀerent values of σA. The values of the other parameters are set according to Appendix C1. Risk-adjusted productivity growth µA. As shown in our revised draft, the dynamics of At under the physical measure is Here we do not necessarily require the growth rate of At under the physical measure to be small, and in particular, below r. The risk-adjusted drift of At, µA, must be below r following the standard no-arbitrage condition. Under the risk-neutral measure, the total return of any asset is equal to r. Upon full adoption, the expected token return under the risk-neutral measure, µP t , converges to µA (see the upper boundary condition for the token pricing ODE), so we must have µP t = µA < r once At increases beyond the upper boundary. In Figure 8, we report the ratio of token price to productivity, Pt/At, over the stages of adoption, Nt in Panel A and the user base, Nt, against the logarithmic productivity ln (At) under diﬀerent values of µA. The ﬁgures show that the qualitative dynamics of Pt and Nt, the two key endogenous variables in the model, are robust to the choices of µA. While the level of token price increases signiﬁcantly in the drift of platform productivity, the adoption curve is largely stable across diﬀerent values of parameters with the case of the highest µA (= 0.03) featuring the fastest adoption.

The volatility of platform productivity, At, certainly drives the volatility of token price. While the endogenous adoption ampliﬁes the volatility, the token price volatility, σP t , is largely in the same magnitude of At’s volatility as shown in Appendix E. The focus of this paper is not on generating excessive volatility. Here we model agents’ adoption and token demand decisions that are purely based on utility maximization under rational expectation, while in reality, a great number of other factors aﬀect token demand (e.g., Griﬃn and Shams, 2018; Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu, 2019). In fact, the upper boundary condition at full adoption shows that the token price evolves in lock-step with the platform productivity after Nt reaches 100%. Therefore, this paper does not investigate whether token volatility deviates from that of fundamentals and why. The aim is thus to develop a rational benchmark of token pricing and endogenous adop- tion. Accordingly, the model has the desirable feature that the key results are largely not aﬀected by the choices of the volatility parameter, σA. Panel A of Figure 9 plots the user base, Nt, for diﬀerent values of σA. The curves are almost identical. As shown by (30) and (31), what determines Nt are At and µP t . Therefore, in Panel A of Figure 9, given At, the adoption curves are similar across diﬀerent values of σA because the values of µP as shown in Panel B. In our model, agents’ decisions on adoption and token demand depends on At and µP t , and the parameter σA only aﬀects agents’ decision through µP t . Using Itˆo’s t = P ′ (At) P (At) AtµA + 1 The choices of σA does not strongly aﬀect the equilibrium outcome because the second-order derivative of Pt to At is close to zero. Panel C reports the token price, which is almost linear in At (i.e., has a second-order derivative close to zero). Agent type distribution G (u). We choose a normal distribution for G (u) and set the parameter in order to generate an adoption curve the matches well the data. Note that even though the participation threshold, ut in (30), has ln (At) in its expression, we cannot draw the conclusion that the adoption curve, Nt = 1 −G (ut), is S-shaped as the cumulative distribution function of normal distribution. The threshold also contains other endogenous variables, such as the current user base, Nt, and the expected token return, µP the adoption curve is S-shaped as a result of multiple endogenous forces in equilibrium together with the parameter choice of G (u). Many blockchain platforms cater to a small group of enthusiasts and thus a distribution

Figure 10: Comparative Statics – The Distribution of ui. This ﬁgure plots the user base, Nt, against the logarithmic productivity, ln (At), under the normal distribution of ui in Appendix C1 (blue solid curve) and the uniform distribution of ui (red dash line). The support of the uniform distribution is [−29, 29], chosen so that the productivity at full adoption matches that of the baseline model. of agents’ type should feature a fat tail. Indeed, this is what a normal distribution of ui captures. Agents’ token holdings and participation proﬁts are given by (28) and (29) respectively. Both are proportional to eui. Therefore, in our model, what drives agents’ activities and proﬁts on the platform is eui, which follows a log-normal distribution when ui follows a normal distribution. The log-normal distribution has its mass concentrated in the small values (i.e., the majority who have low transaction needs) and a heavy tail that extends to very large values (i.e., the minority of very active users). For robustness, we plot in Figure 10 the user base, Nt, against the logarithmic produc- tivity, ln (At), under the normal distribution of ui in Appendix C1 (blue solid curve) and the uniform distribution of ui (red dash line). The support of the uniform distribution is [−29, 29], chosen so that the productivity at full adoption matches that of the baseline model. It is clear that a uniform distribution would not ﬁt the data and our distributional assumption is guided by the need to ﬁt empirical data.

Appendix D. Endogenous Choice of Platform Currency In the main text, we analyze the tokenized and tokenless economies and compare their The numerical solution shows that µP t is positive across the values of At with µA > 0, and therefore, tokens accelerate adoption by reducing the carry cost t . A potential concern is that the conclusion is only valid under the speciﬁc set of parameter values. We address this issue by extending the model to incorporate platform users’ voluntary choice between the numeraire good and token as means of payment on the platform. For this general setup, we can prove that µP t > 0 in equilibrium. Every instant, agents can choose either the numeraire good or tokens as means of pay- ment. The maximized proﬁt from using the numeraire good is given by (21): The maximized proﬁt from using token is given by (29): Considering the choice of currency, a participating agent’s maximized proﬁt is In the states where µP (At) > 0, agents choose token; otherwise, agents can always opt for the numeraire good as means of payment. The adoption-accelerating eﬀect does not require t > 0 for every value of At. As long as there exists values of At such that µP (At) > 0, in those states, participating agents choose to use tokens and derive more proﬁts, and as a result, the user base is higher than that in a tokenless economy. Proposition D1 (Endogenous Currency Choice). If token is available, the user base, Nt, is equal to or larger than the user base in the tokenless economy for any given At. In this more general setting, agents only use tokens when µP t > 0, and thus, by introducing

tokens, platforms accelerate adoption by simply expanding agents’ choice set, allowing them to pick the currency with the lowest carry cost. Next we show that in equilibrium, agents either always choose to use tokens (and µP or always choose to use the numeraire goods as means of payment. We prove this statement by contradiction. Consider an equilibrium where at time t, agents choose to use the numeraire goods, but there exists a positive probability that agents choose to use tokens in the future. To clear the token market, the aggregate token demand must be positive and equal to M. Since agents do not use tokens as means of payment and µP t ≤0, for the aggregate demand to be equal to M, the token price must be zero because the transactional beneﬁt is zero and the expected ﬁnancial return, µP t ≤0 < r. However, there is a positive probability that in the future, agents use tokens, derive transactional benﬁts, and thus Pt > 0. The current Pt = 0 then implies a positive inﬁnite expected return, contradicting µP Proposition D2 (Consistent Choice of Currency). In equilibrium, agents either always use tokens and µP t > 0 or always use the numeraire goods as means of payment. Proposition D2 states that our choice to examine the tokenized and tokenless economics separately in the main text does not lose generality, because even when agents are allowed to choose the platform currency every instant, the equilibria that emerge will either feature complete token usage or complete usage of the numeraire goods. Moreover, in the equilibrium where agents use tokens, µP t > 0 holds in every state of the world.

Figure 11: The Persistent Impact of Shocks and Volatility Ampliﬁcation. This graph shows the ratio of token price volatility, σP t , to productivity volatility, σA, which quantiﬁes the strength of volatility ampliﬁcation by the endogenous user adoption. The solid line shows the baseline model. The dash line shows the model with endogenous platform productivity. Appendix E: Additional Results on Token Price E1: Token Volatility and Endogenous Adoption The shocks to platform productivity are transmitted to token price through users’ decision on adoption and token holdings. In fact, token-price volatility σP t is generally larger than σA, the productivity volatility, as Figure 11 illustrates. To see the intuition, consider a positive shock to At that directly increases the utility ﬂow of token holdings. User adoption increases as a consequence, which leads to an even higher utility ﬂow (as Nt enters into the utility ﬂow). This feedback eﬀect ampliﬁes the shock’s impact on token price, which implies that endogenous user adoption ampliﬁes volatility. Importantly, our model features a new form of endogenous risk that is unique to platform economics. The volatility of token price is larger than the productivity volatility (exogenous risk) in equilibrium due to endogenous adoption. The ampliﬁcation constitutes an endoge- nous asset-price risk that is distinct from the ﬁre-sale risk triggered by the balance-sheet channel in the macro-ﬁnance literature (e.g., He and Krishnamurthy, 2011, 2013; Brunner- meier and Sannikov, 2014). Note that under full adoption Nt = 1, (36) reveals that the ratio of Pt to At is a constant, so σP t = σA and the endogenous risk disappears. The network eﬀect induces strategic complementarity in agents’ adoption decision, and thereby, ampliﬁes the impact of fundamental shock. This mechanism is related to the literature on strategic

complementarity and fragility (e.g., Goldstein and Pauzner, 2005). Here the endogenous risk from strategic complementarity manifests itself in the equilibrium asset (token) price. Figure 11 also shows that the token price volatility exhibits non-monotonic dynamics as the platform productivity grows: σP t shoots up in the early stage, gradually declines, and eventually converges to σA as Nt approaches one. This dynamics is broadly consistent with the following observations: token price volatility for a nascent platform is large and the cross-sectional variation of volatility is also greater for nascent platforms. Our analysis thus far has taken the platform productivity process as exogenous. In reality, many token and cryptocurrency applications feature an endogenous dependence of platform productivity on the user base. A deﬁning feature of blockchain technology is the provision of consensus on decentralized ledgers.32 In general, the more users on the platform, the more economic activities taking place (i.e., higher At). Moreover, a greater user base attracts more resources and research onto the platform, accelerating the technological progress on the platform and creating a positive feedback loop. To capture this positive feedback feature between productivity and user base, we gener- alize the process of At as follows: = ω (Nt −N) dt + σAdZA where ω > 0 and N is the minimal user base to achieve non-negative drift. The lack of early adoption reduces the likelihood of the platform achieving a high level of adoption. Because when At and Nt, are low, µA t is negative, and thus, the only way for At to grow, i.e., dAt > 0, is to have a long sequence of positive shocks, i.e., dZA t > 0. In contrast, when At and Nt are high, At grows from both a positive drift and positive shocks. For our numerical solution, we set ω to 0.04 and N to 0.5, so when Nt < 0.5, µA and when Nt = 1, µA t is equal to 0.02, which is the value of µA in the numerical solution of the main model. Solving the Markov equilibrium under endogenous productivity only requires to replace µA in (6) with ω (Nt −N). The growth rate of At is no longer i.i.d. and the shock’s impact on At becomes more persistent. Consider a positive shock. Not only the current At increases, but through Nt, the growth rate of At increases, propagating the shock’s impact into the future. This ampliﬁes the volatility of token price. 32In a “proof-of-stake” system, the consensus is more robust when the user base is large and dispersed because no single party is likely to hold a majority stake; in a “proof-of-work” system, more miners deliver faster and more reliable conﬁrmation of transactions, and miners’ participation in turn depends on the size of user base (for example, through transaction fees).

Consider a negative shock. It not only drags down the current productivity and adoption but also, through µA t = ω (Nt −N), reduces the likelihood of higher future productivity and adoption. The direct impact on the current adoption decreases the token price via a decline of the current token demand. Moreover, the decline of expected future adoption implies a weaker token demand in the future, and as a result, a decrease of µP discourages adoption and depresses the current token demand, resulting in a further decline of token price. Therefore, we expect the current speciﬁcation to deliver a stronger shock ampliﬁcation eﬀect than the case of constant (and positive) µA. Figure 11 shows that the t to σA is higher with endogenous productivity than with exogenous productivity. Our discussion on the token price volatility relates to the current debate on sources of cryptocurrency volatilities and the possibility of creating stable coins for means of payment. The endogenous adoption is a natural mechanism that transmits and ampliﬁes the shocks to platform fundamentals (At) to the token price. However, as shown in Figure 11, this ampliﬁcation mechanism is not strong under the current parameter choices for our numerical solution. Therefore, if one has in mind a token-based ecosystem as described in our paper, the concern over token price stability, and the associated beneﬁts of having a stable token, should be directed towards the volatility of platform fundamentals rather than active exit/entry To look for stronger volatility ampliﬁcation mechanism, one may consider the economic forces outside of our model, such as behavioral factors and token market structure. E2: Technology Adoption and Bubbly Token Price The prices of several prominent cryptocurrencies experienced signiﬁcant run-up followed by crash and subsequent stabilization. We show that such “bubbly” dynamics of token price dynamics can arise in a rational model with endogenous adoption driving the correlation between the SDF and token return. So far we have set up and analyzed the model under the risk-neutral measure. Next, we explicitly model risk premium as a function of user base Nt. Let ρt denote the instantaneous correlation coeﬃcient between the productivity shock, t in (1), and the SDF shock, d bZΛ t in (88). To model the endogenous beta of platform productivity, we allow ρt to depend on Nt. Suppose that dρ (Nt) /dNt > 0, which means that the productivity beta increases as the user base grows. As the technology becomes more “mainstream,” shocks to it become increasingly systematic. This assumption is inspired by the adoption-dependent beta of new technologies in P´astor and Veronesi (2009). By using Girsanov’s theorem, we obtain the following productivity process under the risk-neutral

Figure 12: The “Bubbly” Behavior of Token Price. This graph plots the ratio of token price, P (At), to the long-run (full-adoption) value of token, P (At), which shows how endogenous adoption shapes the token price dynamics. The solid line shows the baseline model. The dash line shows the model with endogenous systematic risk. bµA −ηρ (Nt) σA When the productivity shock becomes more correlated with the SDF shock, investors demand a higher risk premium, which lowers the risk-adjusted growth of productivity. In other words, the risk-neutral expected growth rate of At is bµA −ηρ (Nt) σA, is lower. To solve the Markov equilibrium, we simply replace µA in (6) with this risk-adjusted drift of At. There are thus two opposing forces that drive Pt as At grows. On the one hand, the mechanism that increases Pt is still present: when At directly increases the ﬂow utility of token, or indirectly through its positive impact on Nt, token price increases. On the other hand, the risk premium increases as Nt increases, so the risk-adjusted growth of At declines, which in turn decreases Pt. The former channel could dominate in the early stage of adoption while the latter channel dominates in the late stage of adoption. Therefore, Pt ﬁrst rises with Nt and then declines as Nt reaches a suﬃciently high level, which resembles a bubble, as shown in the left panel of Figure 12.33 33In the numerical solution, we set bµA = 4% and ρ (Nt) = bµANt/3 for illustrative purposes.

Table 1: Comparing Our Model and Standard Monetary Models This table provides a side-by-side mapping between our tokenized model economy and the standard monetary economic models, such as money-in-utility and cash-in-advance models. One unit of token/money buys: P units of numeraire goods 1/P units of goods Token/money units (nominal value): ki,t units of token M units of money Appendix F: Classic Models and Tokenomics F1: Tokenomics and Monetary Economics By trading in the token market, users proﬁt from platform growth and eﬀectively reduce the carry cost of conducting transacting. Therefore, for payment platforms, the promi- nent adoption problem in platform economics (e.g., Rochet and Tirole, 2006) is naturally connected with the carry cost in the classic models of money as transaction medium (e.g., Baumol, 1952; Tobin, 1956). In the following, we compare our model with the standard monetary models (i.e., the money-in-utility and cash-in-advance models). The token price, Pt is the price of tokens denominated in the numeraire consumption goods. It is how many units of goods that one unit of token can buy. Therefore, xi,t = Ptki,t is the real value of token holdings, and ki,t, the units of tokens, is the nominal value of token holdings. An agent cares about her real token value, i.e., how many units of goods the ki,t units of tokens can be exchanged for, rather than the nominal token value, i.e., the units of tokens, as the agent derives utilities from the real value of transactions in the units of We follow the existing literature on money as means of payment. In theoretical models of monetary economics (e.g., Baumol, 1952; Tobin, 1956; Feenstra, 1986; Freeman and Kydland, 2000) and empirical studies (e.g., Poterba and Rotemberg, 1986; Lucas and Nicolini, 2015; Nagel, 2016), agents derive utility from the real value of money holdings.34 Table 1 provides 34For the nominal value of means of payment to aﬀects agents’ decisions, additional frictions, such as nominal illusion (e.g., Shaﬁr, Diamond, and Tversky, 1997) or sticky prices (e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 2005), have to be introduced into the model.

a side-by-side mapping between our model of tokens as means of payment and the standard models in the monetary economics literature (e.g., money-in-utility and cash-in-advance models). We refer readers to the classical textbook treatments regarding monetary economics (e.g., Gal´ı, 2015; Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2004; Walsh, 2003). Note that our notations diﬀer from those in standard monetary economics literature. We use Pt as the value of token denominated in the numeraire consumption good. This is diﬀerent from the convention that money serves as the numeraire and the prices of goods are denominated in money. The micro-foundation of our ﬂow utility in Appendix A also sheds light on why it is the real (goods) value of token holdings, instead of the nominal value, that matters. Agent i holds ki,t units of tokens in preparation for a Poisson-arriving transaction opportunity because carrying tokens provide payment convenience. When agent i conducts transactions, the transaction counterparty demands payments in the units of numeraire consumption goods instead of in the units of tokens, because eventually, the transaction counterparty cares about the amount of goods that tokens can buy, not tokens themselves.35 F2: Token Pricing and the Black-Scholes Diﬀerential Equation Our token pricing equation (34) shares some common features with the Black-Scholes derivative pricing equation. Both are second-order ordinary diﬀerential equation of an asset price that evolves with an underlying state variable. However, the economic mechanisms that lead to these equations are fundamentally diﬀerent. The Black-Scholes equation is derived from the no-arbitrage condition. Our token pricing equation (34) is obtained from aggregating platform users’ token demand and clearing the token market. In the following, we list the steps that we use to obtain (34) and then discuss its diﬀerences and similarities with the Black-Scholes option derivative equation. 35For example, Opensea is an DApp marketplace on Ethereum that allows users to buy and sell through smart contracts the crypto collectibles, gaming items, and other items that are backed by the Ethereum blockchain. A seller Koryue listed to sell MCH Hero: #40320018 Lv.78 at 6:17:37am on 01/04/2020 for 2.1 ETH, with Ether price then being about 133 USD. The same person relist the item at 5:54:29pm on 01/16/2020 for 1.5 ETH, when Ether price was about 166 USD. The item is sold about an hour later. To the extent that during the short span, agents’ valuation of the item did not change dramatically, we can see that they care about not the number of tokens (2.1 vs 1.5) but the actual dollar value that they can use for oﬄine consumption (279 vs 249). The latter only has slight drop (possibly due the the seller lowering the price slightly), but it diﬀers a lot in ETH. There are many similar cases to show that people think in terms of numeraire (the actual consumption value of those Ethers), not the number of Ethers. When ether price ﬂuctuates, they simply adjust the number of ethers when listing prices.

First note that the state variable for our equilibrium solution is the exogenous productiv- ity At, and thus, all endogenous variables are functions of At in equilibrium. For example, the equilibrium token price can be written as Pt = P (At), a univariate function of At. Sim- ilarly, Nt = N (At) and St = S (At). Figure 7 in Appendix B plots the solved endogenous variables that are all functions of At from our model solution. By rewriting the token-market clearing condition (32), we obtain the following equilibrium condition for the drift µP t = r −(1 −α) By applying Itˆo’s lemma to Pt = P(At), we may express the drift of Pt, µP t , as follows: t = P ′ (At) P (At) AtµA + 1 Finally, (96) with (97) together give us (34), which we state below for the ease of reference: rP (At) = P ′ (At) AtµA + 1 AtσA2 + (1 −α) Next, we compare our token pricing equation with the Black-Scholes derivative pricing equation that values a derivative on a dividend-paying stock. Let St denote the ex-dividend price of stock, which follows a geometric Brownian motion under the physical measure: = (µS −δ)dt + σSdZt, where µS, σS, and δ are all constant and Zt is a standard Brownian motion. Note that this stock continuously pays dividends at a constant dividend yield δ. Let Vt denote the price of a derivative which delivers a contingent payment G(ST) at maturity T, where G( · ) is a function of ST, the underlying stock price at maturity T. (For example, the Black-Scholes European call option pricing formula corresponds to the case where G(ST) = max{ST −K, 0}). By the standard no-arbitrage argument (e.g., Duﬃe, 2001), the value of this derivative, Vt, is given by where Et is the conditional expectation under the risk-neutral measure. the value of the derivative Vt is Markovian, which we express as V (St, t), The standard

no-arbitrage argument implies that V (St, t) satisﬁes the following PDE rV (St, t) = ∂V (St, t) St (r −δ) + 1 StσS2 + ∂V (St, t) Comparing our equilibrium token pricing ODE (34) with (101), the PDE for derivative pricing, we make the following observations: 1. Diﬀerence: Price determination mechanism. The derivative pricing equation is derived from the absence of arbitrage between the derivatives and their underlying assets (and risk-free bonds). Economic proﬁts from trading do not exist in the standard derivative pricing framework. Our token pricing equation is derived from the token market clearing condition, which implies that the marginal participant (with ui = ut) breaks even but all other participants collect positive proﬁts. Agents with ui > ut break even at the margin as required by their ﬁrst-order conditions, but their average revenues are larger than their costs due to the concavity (or decreasing return to scale) of transactional beneﬁts, (xi,t)1−α (NtAteui)α dt, in the numeraire value of token Another diﬀerence between the two pricing equations is that token has an additional “ﬂow” term, (1 −α) the derivatives pricing model does not.36 This “ﬂow” term appears in our model because of the aggregation of heterogeneous users’ demand for tokens as transaction 3. Similarity: the same risk-adjusted expected return. Our token pricing equation and the Black-Scholes pricing equation have the value of asset multiplied by r on the left side, meaning that both feature a marginal risk-adjusted return equal to r, the risk- free rate. Note that the total risk-adjusted return of tokens is the sum of transactional beneﬁts and the ﬁnancial return (see (27) in our revision). 4. Similarity: The coeﬃcients of ∂V (St,t) dAt . The state variable of derivatives is the underlying stock’s price. Since the stock is traded, so it has an expected cum- dividend return equal to r, and thus, its ex-dividend stock price has a drift that is equal 36That there is no ﬂow term in the derivative pricing formula (101) is due to the fact that this derivative does not have any ﬂow payment before maturity T. If we had allowed this derivative to pay holders prior to maturity, the derivative pricing equation (101) would have a “ﬂow” term as well.

to St (r −δ) under the risk-neutral measure, which is the coeﬃcient on ∂V (St,t) underlying state variable of tokens is the platform productivity At. The coeﬃcient on is AtµA, also the state variable’s drift. Since At is not traded, the risk-neutral drift, AtµA, is not equal to Atr, resulting in a shortfall similar to δ in the (r −δ) in 5. Similarity: The quadratic variation terms. Both our token pricing equation and the standard derivative pricing equation have the second-order derivative term which depends on the volatility of the underlying state variable (At for tokens and St for derivatives). As a result, we have the same similar quadratic variation terms ( StσS2 for derivatives) i.e., the coeﬃcients on respectively, from Itˆo’s calculus. 6. Non-essential diﬀerences: ﬁnite maturity versus perpetuity. Tokens in our model are perpetual with no maturity. Standard derivatives often have maturity, and hence, have the additional term ∂V (St,t) in the pricing equation.

---NEW PAPER---

Citation: Paul Gatabazi, Gaëtan Kabera, Jules Clement Mba, Edson Pindza, and Sileshi Fanta Melesse. 2022. Cryptocurrencies and Tokens Lifetime Analysis from 2009 to 2021. Academic Editor: Robert Czudaj Received: 11 December 2021 Accepted: 15 February 2022 Published: 9 March 2022 Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁl- © 2022 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https:// Cryptocurrencies and Tokens Lifetime Analysis from 2009 Paul Gatabazi 1,2,*, Gaëtan Kabera 3, Jules Clement Mba 4 , Edson Pindza 5,6 and Sileshi Fanta Melesse 7 Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics, Faculty of Sciences, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg 2006, South Africa Department of Applied Statistics, School of Economics, College of Business and Economics, University of Rwanda, Huye 124, Rwanda Department of Statistics, University of South Africa—UNISA, Pretoria 0003, South Africa; kaberg@unisa.ac.za School of Economics, College of Business and Economics, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg 2006, Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Tshwane University of Technology, Pretoria 0001, South Africa; Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics, University of Pretoria, Pretoria 0002, South Africa School of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science, University of KwaZulu Natal, Pietermaritzburg 3209, Abstract: The success of Bitcoin has spurred emergence of countless alternative coins with some of them shutting down only few weeks after their inception, thus disappearing with millions of dollars collected from enthusiast investors through initial coin offering (ICO) process. This has led investors from the general population to the institutional ones, to become skeptical in venturing in the cryptocurrency market, adding to its highly volatile characteristic. It is then of vital interest to investigate the life span of available coins and tokens, and to evaluate their level of survivability. This will make investors more knowledgeable and hence build their conﬁdence in hazarding in the cryptocurrency market. Survival analysis approach is well suited to provide the needed information. In this study, we discuss the survival outcomes of coins and tokens from the ﬁrst release of a cryptocurrency in 2009. Non-parametric methods of time-to-event analysis namely Aalen Additive Hazards Model (AAHM) trough counting and martingale processes, Cox Proportional Hazard Model (CPHM) are based on six covariates of interest. Proportional hazards assumption (PHA) is checked by assessing the Kaplan-Meier estimates of survival functions at the levels of each covariate. The results in different regression models display signiﬁcant and non-signiﬁcant covariates, relative risks and standard errors.Among the results, it was found that cryptocurrencies under standalone blockchain were at a relatively higher risk of collapsing. It was also found that the 2013–2017 cryptocurrencies release was at a high risk as compared to 2009–2013 release and that cryptocurrencies for which headquarters are known had the relatively better survival outcomes. This provides clear indicators to watch out for while selecting the coins or tokens in which to invest. Keywords: cryptocurrency; blockchain; survival function; risk; weight; hazard ratio Cryptocurrencies are digital currencies in which transactions are veriﬁed and records maintained by decentralized systems known as blockchains. Blockchains use cryptography or a third-free peer-to-peer electronic system, rather than a centralized trade in which transactions are made by the banks (Angela 2016). Transacting a cryptocurrency is mobile, non-taxable and does not require bank intermediary. Blundell-Wignall (2014) points that digital cash cannot have multiple copies. Hence, a cryptocurrency cannot be used more than once, unlike the bank services where multiple transfers are common. Economies 2022, 10, 60. https://doi.org/10.3390/economies10030060

Economies 2022, 10, 60 Cryptocurrecies operate either as coins or tokens. Crypto-coins are native from their own blockchain whilst tokens are built on top of another existing blockchain (Wu et al. 2018). An important number of cryptocurrencies use Euthereum network as an alternative to standalone. Many other known networks include Waves, Stellar, Nem, Couterparty, Bitshares, Achain, Omni, Neo, Ardor, Qtum, Icon and Ubiq. The discretion in cryptocur- rency transaction makes a more secure and reliable modern mode of payment as suggest manuscripts such as Blundell-Wignall (2014), Hendrickson et al. (2016) or Urquhart (2016). The cryptocurrencies release started with the Bitcoin in 2009 Blundell-Wignall (2014). The other popular cryptocurrencies that followed include Litecoin (2011), Peercoin (2012), Ripple (2012), Alphacoin (2013–2014) and Aircoin (2014–2016). As for the year 2021, the new cryptocurrencies include Bogged Finance (2021) and Recharge Finance (2020). The total number of cryptocurrencies in 2021 exceeds 6000 in which around 2000 are inactive (or dead) (Best 2022). The high rate of death of cryptocurrencies has been a barrier of many investors. The risk of collapsing of a number of cryptocurrencies has persuaded some governments to ban such digital ﬁnancial markets with argument that cryptocurrency trade could facilitate illegal transactions and disrupting the government activities (Hendrickson et al. 2016). However, El Salvador ofﬁcially adopted Bitcoin as legal tender on 9 June 2021, making it the ﬁrst country to do so (Thul 2021). In some other countries such as Panama, Brasil, Paraguay, Mexico and Argentina, the governments are hand in hand with the researchers on sustainability of Bitcoin for a future adoption (Thul 2021). In 2020, the globe was under a relatively rising situation of the outbreak of COVID-19 and at the same time, the relatively high degree spillover of Bitcoin was observed (Xiao et al. 2021). The trade of cryptocurrencies was then globally affected (Youssef et al. 2021). Azimli (2020) suggests that COVID-19 pandemic impacts the ﬁnancial market through the high level of economic policy uncertainty. The unknown future situation of COVID-19 leads to low cash ﬂow expectations, resulting in possible stock market depreciation (Azimli 2020). Several studies on cryptocurrencies emerged in many domains such as Mathematical Sciences, Financial Economics and Engineering. Mathematical and statistical modeling on cryptocurrency is found for example in (Gatabazi et al. 2019a, 2019b, 2019c, 2019d) and Chan et al. (2017). Mba and Wang (2019) used copula in describing cryptocurrencies in ﬁnancial economics framework, a ﬁeld in which many other manuscripts including Urquhart (2016) and Angela (2016) analyse cryptocurrencies. However, the scientiﬁc analysis on the lifetime of cryptocurrencies is not yet popular. To understand the event history analysis of cryptocurrencies and the associated factors may adopt another insight by which the researcher may predict accurately the future of these digital currencies. The present study uses the time-to-event data analysis for estimating the life-time and the factors of death for cryptocurrencies during the study time ranging from 2009 to 2021. In addition to the introductory section, the study is subdivided as follows: Section 2 presents the methodology of the study. Section 3 presents the main results and interpreta- tion and Section 4 gives a conclusion. This part introduces the time-to-event analysis, discusses the time-to-event regression analysis and then presents the dataset of interest. Preliminary analysis will be displayed by the graphs and the useful statistical tests. 2.1. Concept of the Time-to-Event Data Analysis The time-to-event analysis or survival analysis aims at making the inference of the time elapsed between the onset of observations until the occurrence of some event of interest. The related regression model expresses the dependence of time-to-event on predictor variables. Methods used in general statistical analysis, in particular in regression analysis, are not directly applicable to survival data due to censoring and truncation. Hosmer et al. (2008) describe three types of censoring: right censoring arising when an individual is not subject to the event until the end of study due to either loss to follow up, or the event

Economies 2022, 10, 60 has not occurred at the end of the study, or the event has occurred from another cause not related to the cause of interest. Left censoring arises when an individual experienced an event before the onset of the study. Interval censoring refers to when the event occurs within some interval in the study time, or the individual dropped out or observed the event at an unknown time before study termination for reasons unrelated to the study, or the individual was lost to follow-up in an interval between two speciﬁed time points. Two types of truncation described in Klein and Moeschberger (2003) are the left truncation and the right truncation. Left truncation occurs when subjects under a survival study have been at risk before the study time. Right truncation arises when interest is only on individuals who have experienced the event by a speciﬁed future time before study termination. In this study, interest will be only on right censoring. In time-to-event analysis, a non-negative random variable representing the time-to- event is generally characterized by three fundamental functions: the probability density function (for continuous random variables) or probability mass function (for discrete random variables), the survival function and the hazard function as detailed in Hosmer et al. (2008). The hazard function is also known as risk function or intensity rate (Hosmer et al. 2008). Any of these three functions can be uniquely determined from at least one of the other two functions (Collet 2003; Hosmer et al. 2008). 2.2. Comparison of Two or More Groups of Survival Data Two or more groups survival time may be compared by using the plots of the survival functions in one system of axes. Log-rank and Wilcoxon tests are popular tests for compar- ing survival functions (Collet 2003; Klein and Moeschberger 2003). The tests are based on H0: No difference in survival experiences of the individuals in the groups, H1: There is difference in survival experiences of the individuals in the groups. In several studies, statistical signiﬁcance is based on comparing p-values to a speciﬁed level of signiﬁcance, α Generally α = 0.05 or α = 0.01. In this study, we prefer using the interpretation described in Collet (2003) that is summarised in Table 1. The same interpretation was used in Gatabazi and Kabera (2015), and Gatabazi et al. (2018, 2019e, Table 1. Evidence for or against H0 based on comparing the p-value with the level of signiﬁcance No evidence to reject the null hypothesis 0.05 < P ≤0.1 Slight evidence against the null hypothesis 0.01 < P ≤0.05 Moderate evidence against the null hypothesis Strong evidence against the null hypothesis Overwhelming evidence against the null hypothesis The log-rank test is better if proportional hazards can be assumed (Collet 2003). In such situation, the plots of survival functions do not cross one another. The Wilcoxon test is suitable when there is no proportional hazards assumption. Here, the survival curves of some groups cross one another (Collet 2003). 2.3. Cox Proportional Hazards Model (CPHM) Assume p ﬁxed covariates with values xi = (xi1, xi2, . . . , xip)′ for i = 1, . . . , n where n is the number of observations.

Economies 2022, 10, 60 The CPHM is given by h(t | xi) = h0(t) exp(β′xi) where β = (β1, β2, . . . , βp)′ is a p-dimensional vector of model parameters and and h0(t) is the baseline hazard function, that the hazard function when all the covariates are set to is called “hazard ratio”, and is reported in applied studies as it is easier to interpret than the model parameters or log-hazard ratio βk = ln ψk for k = 1, . . . , p (Collet 2003). Parameter estimation for model (1) with no tied events is conducted using partial likelihood introduced by Cox (1972). Three approaches of approximating the partial likelihood in presence of tied event are suggested by Breslow (1974), Efron (1977) and Cox (1972). In practice, the three approximations of the partial likelihood function lead to similar results (Collet 2003). Many statistical packages, including STATA, provide options for using each of the above approximations. In STATA, Beslow is taken as the default. 2.4. Aalen Additive Hazards Model (AAHM) The AAHM at time t of the ith of n individuals is given by h[t | xi(t)] = β0(t) + β1(t)xi1(t) + β2(t)xi2(t) + . . . + βp(t)xip(t)  β0(t), β1(t), . . . , βp(t) ′ is the vector of parameter functions that may be estimated and xi(t) =  xi1(t), xi2(t), . . . , xip(t) ′ is the vector of covariates. The parameter function β0(t) is the baseline hazard function, that is the hazard when all the covariate functions are set to zero. Aalen et al. (2008, p. 157) argue that, for computation stability, estimation in model (3) should be based on the cumulative parameter functions k = 0, 1, 2, . . . , p. Clearly, if βk(t) is constant, say βk(t) = βk, then 0 βkdv = βk t which is represented by a straight line. if individual i is at risk at time t Assume that dNi(t) and dMi(t) are respectively a response variable and a random error terms of the ith individual. Model (3) leads to the form where xi0 = 1. The proof of Proposition 1 can be found for example in Gatabazi et al. (2020b). Thus, Model (5) has the form of a multiple linear regression model for the ith individual with covariates Yi(t)xik and parameters dBk(t) for k = 0, 1, 2, . . . , p and i = 0, 1, 2, . . . , n.

Economies 2022, 10, 60 Model (5) can be written in matrix form as dN(t) = X(t)dB(t) + dM(t) dN(t) is the n × 1 vector of observations dNi(t) X(t) is the n × (p + 1) design matrix with ith row given by Yi(t), Yi(t)xi1(t), . . . , Yi(t)xip(t)  dB0(t), dB1(t), . . . , dBp(t) ′ is the (p + 1) × 1 vector of parameter functions dM(t) is the n × 1 vector of martingales (error terms) each with mean zero. It follows from (6) and from the theory of least square estimation that if X(t) is of full rank, that is [X(t)]′X(t) is non singular, then the ordinary least squares estimator of dB(t) is If X(t) is not of full rank, then dB(t) is not estimable unless some constraint is imposed. However, most of current statistical packages have built-in routines to deal with matrices that are not of full rank and provide robust estimates of model parameters. The estimator bB(t) obtained by integrating both sides of Equation (7) with respect to t is where yj is n × 1 vector of zeros except the jth component equals to unit if the jth indi- vidual observes an event at time tj (Aalen et al. 2008, p. 158; Hosmer and Royston 2002). Furthermore, the variance-covariance matrix of bB(t) is where D(tj) is an n × n diagonal matrix with elements yj on the main diagonal (Aalen et al. 2008, p. 158; Hosmer and Royston 2002). The derivation of results (9) from (8) is easy to understand. In fact if two random vectors of variables X and Y are linked by Y = AX, where A is a matrix, then Var(Y) = A Var(X) A′ As described in Hosmer and Royston (2002), if the vector of cumulative parameter coefﬁcients at time t is estimated by (8), and its variance-covariance matrix by (9), then the estimator of the model vector of parameters at time tj is Aalen et al. (2008, p. 159) showed that the cumulative parameter function estimator ˆB(t) has approximately a multivariate normal distribution around its true value B(t),

Economies 2022, 10, 60 with the variance-covariance matrix expressed in (9). Therefore, the 100(1 −α)% conﬁdence interval for the kth cumulative parameter functions Bk(t) is expressed by bBk(t) ± z α where ˆσkk(t) is the kth diagonal element of the variance-covariance matrix expressed in the Equation (9). To test that a covariate Xk has no signiﬁcant effect on the hazard function given in model (3), Aalen et al. (2008) formulated the null and alternative hypotheses in the usual way as follows H0 : βk(t) = 0, ∀t ∈[0, t0] H1 : βk(t) > 0 or βk(t) < 0 where t0 is a suitably chosen time point, but often t0 is the upper limit of the study time interval. If H0 is true, then the increment ∆ˆBk(tj) at time tj of the cumulative parameter function given in (8) tends to ﬂuctuate around zero (Aalen et al. 2008). Under the alternative hypothesis H1 : βk(t) > 0, the increment ∆ˆBk(tj) tends to be positive while under H1 : βk(t) < 0, the increment ∆ˆBk(tj) tends to be negative. Furthermore if bBk(t) approximately follows a straight line, then βk(t) is constant. The test described above is helpful when the estimated cumulative parameter functions are plotted against time. However, a quantitative measure of signiﬁcance may be needed to assess the magnitude of signiﬁcance. Hosmer and Royston (2002) advised to proceed as follows. Consider model (3) and assume that there is a need to test the null hypothesis H0 : βk(tj) = 0 for all k with k = 0, 1, . . . , p. Hosmer and Royston (2002) stated that the (p + 1) statistics for the above hypothesis are obtained from the components of the vector where ˆβ(tj) given by (10) is the vector of estimators of the parameter coefﬁcients for model (3), and Kj is a (p + 1) × (p + 1) diagonal matrix of weights. Four types of weights can Weights 1: Kj = diag(1), that is Kj is a diagonal matrix with each element of the main diagonal equals to unit. Weights 2: Kj = diag(nj) where nj is the number of individuals at risk at time tj. Weights 3: Kj = diag where bSKM(tj−1) is the Kaplan–Meier estimate of the survival function at time tj−1 for j = 2, 3, . . . and K1 = diag Weights 4: Kj = diag where ˆβkk(tj) is the kth diagonal element of the variance-covariance matrix (11). Hence, Kj is a diagonal matrix whose main diagonal elements are the ratio of the Kaplan–Meier estimates of the survival function at time tj−1 and the standard error of the Aalen estimate of the parameter function of interest at time tj.

Economies 2022, 10, 60 To completely deﬁne the test statistic to use, the estimator of the variance-covariance matrix of ˆu given in (14) is obtained from the symmetric matrix Kj and the variance of ˆβ(tj) given by (11). Hence, Hence, the test statistic for H0 given in (13) is where ˆuk is the kth element of ˆu given in (14) and se(ˆuk) is the square root of the kth diagonal Var( ˆu) given in (15). Hosmer and Royston (2002) pointed out that the statistic zuk in (16) approximately follows the standard normal distribution. Among over 6000 active and inactive cryptocurrencies, we recorded 500 cryptocur- rencies whose information on the variables of interest is available. The details of other cryptoccurrencies is not available, and for many of them, the white papers are not decen- tralized. The covariates of interest are described in Table 2. Table 2. Description of variables of interest. The type of a cryptocurrency Indicator of the type of blockchain of a cryptocurrency Indicator on when a cryptocurrency was released 0 = series 1 (2009–2013) 1 = series 2 (2013–2017) 2 = series 3 (2017–2021) Indicator on whether a cryptocurrency is minable or not 0 = not minable Region in which a cryptocurrency’ s’headquarters are based 1 = South America 3 = North America The Kaplan–Meir estimation of the overall survival function (Figure 1) at the end of the study time is 75%, or equivalently, the rate of death at the end of the study time is 25%. The time is in years with origin ﬁxed in 2009.

Economies 2022, 10, 60 Figure 1. Kaplan–Meier estimates and 95% conﬁdence limits of the survival function for the cryp- The survival outcomes of the levels of the variables can be compared graphically by using the Kaplan–Meier estimation of the survival function per group of covariate. The plots are displayed in Figure 2. The log-rank and Wilcoxon test statistics are summarized in Figure 2a suggests that the survival outcome is signiﬁcantly better for tokens as compared to coins (χ2 = 42.02; p < 0.001). Figure 2b indicates a relatively better survival outcome for cryptocurrencies under Ethereum (χ2 = 66.90; p < 0.001). Figure 2d suggests a signiﬁcant high risk as a cryptocurrency is minable (χ2 = 32.22; p < 0.001). Among the levels of the variable Series, cryptocurrencies released in the series 2009–2013 present signiﬁcantly better survival outcomes (χ2 = 8.04; p = 0.018) as Figure 2d indicates, this is the same for South American cryptocurrencies (χ2 = 132.03; p < 0.001) as Figure 2e shows of the variable Region. Table 3. Log-rank and Wilcoxon test statistics. Log-Rank χ2 Test Statistic (p-Value) Wilcoxon χ2 Test Statistic (p-Value) 42.02 (p < 0.001) 35.45 (p < 0.001) 66.90 (p < 0.001) 55.62 (p < 0.001) 32.22 (p < 0.001) 22.34 (p < 0.001) 153.49 (p < 0.001) 132.03 (p < 0.001) The log-rank test for comparison is suitable for comparing levels of covariates that obey the proportional hazard assumption (PHA); these are covariates Type, Blockchain and Mining for which the plots are approximately parallel. Wilcoxon test is suitable in comparing the levels of covariates Series and Region for which corresponding plots cross each other, leading to the violation of the PHA.

Economies 2022, 10, 60 Figure 2. Plots of the Kaplan–Meier estimates of the survival function for levels of covariates from 2009 to 2021. (a) Type, (b) Blockchain, (c) Mining, (d) Series, (e) Region. 3. Results and Interpretation 3.1. Cox Proportional Hazards Model (CPHM) Unlike Kaplan–Meier estimation, which treats one variable at a time, the the CPHM makes inference by considering several variables at a time. Table 4 presents the estimated hazard ratios based on all the covariates. The model suggests that the risk of death of cryptocurrencies under standalone blockchain is 2.771 (95% CI: 1.221; 6.288) times that of cryptocurrencies under the re- The signiﬁcance for covariate Region is observed in North America, Europe and Asia. I all these regions the survival outcomes are better than the referral level. The CPHM suggests that the risk of death of cryptoccurrencies from unknown region is 6.757 (95% CI: [3.106; 14.706]) times that of cryptocurrencies based in North America. Such risk is 4.348 (95% CI: [2.439; 7.752]) times that of cryptocurrencies based in Europe and 13.333 (95% CI: [5.181; 34.483]) times that of cryptocurrencies based Asia.

Economies 2022, 10, 60 Table 4. Cox Proportional hazards model for all covariates. 3.2. Aalen Additive Hazards Model (AAHM) Hosmer and Royston (2002) designed a STATA code based on an ado ﬁle for analysing survival data using the AAHM. Figure 3a displays the cumulative parameter function with its 95% conﬁdence limits for cryptocurrencies under Ethereum blockchain. The plot oscillates around the zero line, and the plot of 95% conﬁdence limits are on either sides of the zero line. This indicates that the slope may be zero at some time value, and the risk of cryptocurrencies under Ethereum may not be signiﬁcantly different from that of the referral group. The same AAHM results are observed for the crypto-coins (Figure 3c) and minable cryptocurrencies (Figure 3d). Figure 3b indicates that the cumulative parameter function for cryptocurrencies under standalone blockchain is positive, and so is the major part of the 95% conﬁdence limits. This suggests that the risk of such cryptocurrencies is higher than that of the referral group. The same observation occurred for cryptocurrencies released from the year 2013 as Figure 4 gives the plots of the cumulative parameter functions and their 95% conﬁ- dence limits for levels of the variable Region. The cumulative parameter functions with their 95% conﬁdence limits are negative for levels South America (Figure 4a), North America (Figure 4c), Europe (Figure 4d) and Asia (Figure 4e). The pattern for level Oceania is negative together with the major parts of its conﬁdence limits (Figure 4b). This suggests a relatively higher risk of cryptocurrencies of the referral region. The pattern for level Africa (Figure 4f) oscillates around the zero line, and the plot of 95% conﬁdence limits are on either sides of the zero line. This indicates that the slope may be zero at some time value, and the risk of African cryptocurrencies may not be signiﬁcantly different from that of the referral region. Table 5 displays the results of the test statistics of the AAHM for all the covariates using the four types of weights. All the tests are against the difference of the levels of covariate Mining. The test based on type 4 weights suggests the moderate evidence of difference of the levels of covariate Type and the overwhelming difference of levels of covariates Blockchain, Series and Region. The overwhelming difference for levels of covariate Series and some levels of covariate Region is also noticed by test 1, 2 and 3.

Economies 2022, 10, 60 Figure 3. AAHM for levels of covariates Type, Blockchain, Mining and Series. (a) Ethereum, (b) Stan- dalone, (c) Coin, (d) Minable, (e) Series 2 (2013–2017), (f) Series 3 (2017–2021).

Economies 2022, 10, 60 Figure 4. AAHM for levels of covariate Region. (a) South America, (b) Oceania, (c) North America, (d) Europe, (e) Asia, (f) Africa. Table 5. Tests for signiﬁcance of covariates.

Economies 2022, 10, 60 This paper used survival regression models for analysing the risk to death of the cryptocurrencies from 2009 to Q2 2021. The dataset is a sample of 500 cryptocurrencies for which a correct information on the covariates of interest were found. The exploration was conducted using the Kaplan–Meier estimation of the survival function. The Cox Proportional Hazards Model (CPHM) also was used and suggested a rela- tively higher risk for cryptocurrencies under standalone blockchain. This result was also found by the plot of the survival functions of the levels of blockchain covariate. It was found by the CPHM that cryptocurrencies released in the series 2013–2017 are at a high risk as compared to those of 2009–2013 release. The CPHM also suggested that cryptocurrencies for which headquarters are unknown are at a relatively higher risk. The results of the Aalen Additive Hazards Models (AAHM) showed that unlike other covariates, the levels of covariate Mining are not signiﬁcantly different. Among more than 6000 active and inactive cryptocurrencies, this paper considered 500 cryptocurrencies for which the information on the variables of interest were easily found. The study still needs improvement by considering a relatively bigger sample size. Apart from considering a big sample in future research, re-sampling may also improve the measurement of the standard errors and then evaluate the accuracy of the results found in Author Contributions: Conceptualization, P.G., G.K., J.C.M. and E.P.; methodology, P.G, G.K. and S.F.M.; software, G.K. and P.G.; validation, P.G. and G.K.; formal analysis, P.G. and G.K.; investi- gation, P.G. and G.K.; resources, J.C.M.; data curation, P.G.; writing—original draft preparation, P.G.; writing—review and editing, P.G. and J.C.M.; visualization, P.G.; supervision, J.C.M. and E.P.; project administration, E.P. and J.C.M. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of Funding: This research received no external funding. Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable. Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable. Data Availability Statement: The datasets analysed in the current study are available from anyone of the authors on request. Acknowledgments: We thank Alex Munyengabe for the great help in data collection and Josiane M. Gatabazi for proofreading and editing the text. The research was supported by the University of Johannesburg via the Global Excellence and Stature (GES 4.0) scholarship; grant no. 201281874. Conﬂicts of Interest: No conﬂict of interest regarding the publication of this paper. Aalen, Odd Olai, Ørnulf Borgan, and Håkon Kristian Gjessing. 2008. Survival and Event History Analysis. New York: Springer. Angela, Scott-Briggs. 2016. Ten types of digital currencies and how they work. Online Trading: Free Introductory eBook 2016: 24. Azimli, Asil. 2020. The impact of COVID-19 on the degree of dependence and structure of risk-return relationship: A quantile regression approach. Finance Research Letters 36: 101648. [CrossRef] [PubMed] Blundell-Wignall, Adrian. 2014. The Bitcoin question: Currency versus trust-less transfer technology. In OECD Working Papers on Finance, Insurance and Private Pensions, No 37. Paris: OECD Publishing. Breslow, Norman Edward. 1974. Covariance analysis of censored survival data. Biometrics 30: 89–99. [CrossRef] [PubMed] Chan, Stephen, Jeffrey Chu, Saralees Nadarajah, and Joerg Osterrieder. 2017. A statistical analysis of cryptocurrencies. Journal of Risk and Financial Management 10: 12. [CrossRef] Collet, David. 2003. Modeling Survival Data in Medical Research, 2nd ed. London: Chapman & Hall. Cox, David Roxbee. 1972. Regression models and life-tables (with discussion). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 34: De Best, Raynor. 2022. Number of cryptocurrencies worldwide. Statista 1: 2022. Efron, Bradley. 1977. The efﬁciency of Cox’s likelihood function for censored data. Journal of the American Statistical Association 72: Gatabazi, Paul, and Gaëtan Kabera. 2015. Survival Analysis and Its Stochastic Process Approach with Application to Diabetes Data. Johannesburg: University of Johannesburg.

Economies 2022, 10, 60 Gatabazi, Paul, Jules Clement Mba and Edson Pindza. 2019a. Analysis of Cryptocurrencies Adoption Using Fractional Grey Lotka-Volterra Models. Johannesburg: University of Johannesburg. Gatabazi, Paul, Jules Clement Mba, and Edson Pindza. 2019b. Fractional Grey Lotka-Volterra model with application to cryptocurren- cies adoption. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 29: 073116. [CrossRef] [PubMed] Gatabazi, Paul, Jules Clement Mba, and Edson Pindza. 2019c. Modeling cryptocurrencies transaction counts using variable-order fractional grey Lotka-Volterra dynamical system. Chaos Solitons & Fractals 127: 283–90. Gatabazi, Paul, Jules Clement Mba, Edson Pindza, and Coenraad Labuschagne. 2019d. Grey Lotka-Volterra model with application to cryptocurrencies adoption. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 122: 47–57. Gatabazi, Paul, Melesse Sileshi Fanta, and Shaun Ramroop. 2019e. Resampled Cox proportional hazards model for the infant mortality at the Kigali University Teaching Hospital. The Open Public Health Journal 12: 136–44. [CrossRef] Gatabazi, Paul, Melesse Sileshi Fanta, and Shaun Ramroop. 2018. Multiple events model for the infant mortality at Kigali University Teaching Hospital. The Open Public Health Journal 11: 464–73. [CrossRef] Gatabazi, Paul, Melesse Sileshi Fanta, and Shaun Ramroop. 2020a. Comparison of three classes of marginal risk set model in predicting infant mortality among newborn babies at Kigali University Teaching Hospital, Rwanda, 2016. BMC Pediatrics 20: 62. [CrossRef] Gatabazi, Paul, Melesse Sileshi Fanta, and Shaun Ramroop. 2020b. Some Statistical Methods in Analysis of Single and Multiple Events with Application to Infant Mortality Data. KwaZulu Natal: University of KwaZulu Natal. Hendrickson, Joshua, Thomas Hogan, and William Luther. 2016. The political economy of Bitcoin. Economics Inquiry 54: 925–39. Hosmer, David, Stanley Lemeshow, and Susanne May. 2008. Regression Modeling of Time-to-Event Data, 2nd ed. Haboken: John Wiley & Hosmer, David and Patrick Royston. 2002. Using Aalen’s linear hazards model to investigate time-varying effects in the proportional hazards regression model. The STATA Journal 2: 331–50. [CrossRef] Klein, John, and Melvin Moeschberger. 2003. Techniques for Censored and Truncated Data, 2nd ed. New York: Springer. Mba, Jules Clement, and Qing-Guo Wang. 2019. Multi-Period Portfolio Optimization: A Differential Evolution Copula-Based Approach. Johannesburg: University of Johannesburg. Mulaik, Stanley. 2009. Foundations of Factor Analysis, 2nd ed. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC. Thul, Joaquin. 2021. El Salvador legalises Bitcoin: Hype or breakthrough? Infocus Macro Comment 9: 2021. Urquhart, Andrew. 2016. The inefﬁciency of Bitcoin. Economics Letters 148: 80–82. [CrossRef] Wu, Ke, Spencer Wheatley, and Didier Sornette. 2018. Classiﬁcation of cryptocurrency coins and tokens by the dynamics of their market capitalizations. Royal Sosiety Open Science 5: 180381. [CrossRef] Xiao, Hui, Xiong Xiong, and Weiwei Chen. 2021. Introduction to the special issue on impact of COVID-19 and cryptocurrencies on the global fnancial market. Financial Innovation 7: 27. [CrossRef] Youssef, Manel, Khaled Mokni, and Ahdi Noomen Ajmi. 2021. Dynamic connectedness between stock markets in the presence of the COVID-19 pandemic: Does economic policy uncertainty matter? Financial Innovation 7: 13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

---NEW PAPER---

Institutional Knowledge at Singapore Management University Institutional Knowledge at Singapore Management University Research Collection Lee Kong Chian School Of Lee Kong Chian School of Business In search of cryptocurrency failure In search of cryptocurrency failure Singapore Management University, tujun@smu.edu.sg Follow this and additional works at: https://ink.library.smu.edu.sg/lkcsb_research Part of the Finance Commons, and the Finance and Financial Management Commons MA, Donglian; Jun TU; and ZHU, Zhaobo. In search of cryptocurrency failure. (2023). 1-82. This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Lee Kong Chian School of Business at Institutional Knowledge at Singapore Management University. It has been accepted for inclusion in Research Collection Lee Kong Chian School Of Business by an authorized administrator of Institutional Knowledge at Singapore Management University. For more information, please email cherylds@smu.edu.sg.

In Search of Cryptocurrency Failure This paper explores the determinants of cryptocurrency failure and the pricing of crypto failure risk. We document different significant market- and characteristic-based predictors for coin and token failures. The introduction of Bitcoin futures and the outbreak of COVID- 19 affect the importance of many predictors. Investors require extra return for bearing high failure risk of crypto assets. The return difference across high and low failure risk crypto assets is not explained by the market, size and momentum factors in the cryptocurrency market. Finally, investors benefit from diversifying into high failure risk crypto assets that is little correlated with the stock market. JEL Classification: G11, G12 Keywords: Cryptocurrency; Failure risk; Risk-return tradeoff; Asset allocation; COVID-  We would like to thank Tse-Chun Lin, Yukun Liu, Daniel Rabetti, Jianfeng Yu, Haoxi Yang, and Yueteng Zhu, and seminar and conference participants in the 2022 Financial Engineering and Quantitative Finance Forum in Xiamen University, the 2022 China International Risk Forum (Modern Risk Society - CCER Database Research Excellence Award in Big Data and Fintech), the 2022 Risk Management Conference at the National University of Singapore, the 2022 FinTech Innovation and Risk Management Conference (Best Paper Award), and the 2022 Chinese Finance Annual Meeting for their helpful comments. We thank Luying Wang for excellent research assistant. Any remaining errors are ours alone. † Faculty of Business, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. Email: donglian.ma@polyu.edu.hk. ‡ Department of Finance, Lee Kong Chian School of Business, Singapore Management University, Singapore. § Shenzhen Audencia Financial Technology Institute, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China; Audencia Business School, Nantes, France. Email: zb.zhu@szu.edu.cn. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

“Cryptocurrencies lose $205 billion in 24 hours” The cryptocurrency market has experienced rapid growth in recent years.2 There have been about 12 thousands of cryptocurrencies with market capitalization of $1,885 billion until September 2021.3 Proponents for crypto assets advocate that at least some blockchain- based cryptocurrencies with anonymous and decentralized nature must have a stake in the future of the payment and have positive real economic outcomes (e.g., Böhme et al., 2015; Howell, Niessner, and Yermack, 2020). In contrast, critics argue that cryptocurrencies are a speculative and shady business without enough government regulations because current cryptocurrencies are neither a revenue-producing asset nor a store of value (e.g., Gandal et al., 2018; Foley, Karlsen, and Putninš, 2019; Griffin and Shams, 2020). Nevertheless, no matter whether cryptocurrencies themselves have real economic value or not, it is not yet fully clear how investors can assess the failure probability of crypto assets regardless of failures due to the burst of bubbles or scams.4 Moreover, should investors hold some cryptocurrencies despite their high failure risk? Whether and how investors should diversify some of their wealth into crypto assets? To address these important questions, in this paper, we explore the determinants of cryptocurrency failure and assess the economic importance of risky crypto assets from the failure risk-return 1 Cited in https://fortune.com/2022/01/21/cryptocurrency-crash-bitcoin-ether-cardano-doge-205-billion- 2 Crypto.com estimated that about 106 million people are now using cryptocurrencies around the world. 3 These numbers are estimated based on the data in coinmarketcap.com. 4 The terms cryptocurrency and crypto are used interchangeably in this paper. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

tradeoff perspective and the asset allocation perspective, providing novel insights on the bright and dark sides of crypto assets. We first aim to build a deep understanding of failure risk in the crypto market. Existing studies pay little attention to the failure risk in the crypto market and its determinants and pricing despite high crypto failures, while common risk factors in cryptocurrency, crypto market manipulation, and initial coin offering (ICO) attract much attention.5 Standard risk factor models in existing studies such as Liu et al. (2022) do not explicitly consider failure risk. Losses associated with failures are permanent for investors regardless of leverage, while losses due to price manipulation may recover for unleveraged investors.6 In addition, this paper focuses on cryptocurrencies traded in crypto exchanges, while more and more cryptocurrencies traded in exchanges were not issued through ICOs.7 Our study complements existing studies about the risk of cryptos from a novel perspective. Crypto failure risk warrants our attention for several reasons. First, failure probability is astonishingly high in the crypto market, which is much higher than that in the stock and bond markets. It is estimated that there are over 2,300 failure events during the period of 2014 to 2020. During this period, about 1,000 newly listed cryptocurrencies (i.e., about 28% newly listed coins and 15% newly listed tokens) failed within the first year after they listed 5 Studies about factor models for the crypto market include Liu and Tsyvinski (2021), Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu (2022), and Bianchi and Babiak (2022). Studies about crypto market manipulation such as pump-and- dump schemes, wash trading, scams within the exchange, and other forms of manipulation include Gandal et al. (2018), Griffin and Shams (2020), Cong et al. (2021), Li, Shin, and Wang (2021), Dhawan and Putninš (2022), Amiram, Lyandres, and Rabetti (2022). Studies about the determinants of ICO and post-ICO performance include, among others, Liu, Sheng, and Wang (2021), Lyandres, Palazzo, and Rabetti (2022). 6 We admit that price manipulation for small cryptos may lead to permanent losses for investors, especially for investors with high leverage. However, these event studies focus on a small set of cryptos. 7 In our sample, less than 10% (40%) of coins (tokens) listed in CoinMarketCap experience ICO. Our study focuses on cryptocurrencies that meet the listing criteria in main crypto exchanges, while many ICOs do not meet the exchange listing criteria. Our sample is quite different from that in Lyandres et al. (2022). We focus on the secondary crypto market, while Lyandres et al. (2022) focus on the primary crypto market. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

in CoinMarketCap. Moreover, about 80% of newly listed cryptocurrencies would be dead within 5 years. Second, high failure probability leads to astonishingly large economic losses. Based on the data in CoinMarketCap, our estimated total losses of cryptocurrency failures are about $33.6 billion during 2014 to 2020, with an average annual loss of $4.8 billion. On average, investors in aggregate suffer from about $8.2 million in each coin failure event and $26.9 million in each token failure event. Third, unlike potentially temporary losses from large or popular cryptos due to price manipulation or market crashes for unleveraged investors, permanent losses are associated with crypto failures even for It is therefore crucial and necessary to explore the determinants of cryptocurrency failure and the economic value of crypto failure in asset allocation and risk management. Because cryptocurrency is an emerging virtual asset that is fundamentally different from traditional financial assets such as equity and bond in many aspects, we start with some basic empirical questions that should be answered in the context of an emerging crypto asset. In particular, how should we define cryptocurrency failure? What is the probability that a cryptocurrency fails? Our empirical work begins with defining cryptocurrency failure. In a seminal study, Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi (2008) broadly consider firm bankruptcies, financially driven delistings, and default credit ratings as corporate failure. Because cryptocurrencies have no fundamental value and credit rating and there is no delisting mechanism in the 8 Note that a substantial portion of the mega losses such as $205 and $275 billion in January and May in 2022 are due to large price decreases of some main cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and Ethereum, which do not fail. The investors without leverage can recover their losses when the prices of these main cryptocurrencies Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

crypto exchanges, we cannot identify whether a cryptocurrency is financially distressed, has a default rating, or is delisted from exchanges. From a practical perspective, we define that a cryptocurrency fails if it has no trading activity over the next 26 consecutive weeks in exchanges.9 There are totally 1,570 coin failure events and 775 token failure events during the period of 2014 to 2020.10 About 28% of coins and 15% of tokens failed within the first year after they listed in CoinMarketCap. The failure probability in the crypto market is obviously much higher than that in the stock and bond markets. Next, we explore the determinants of cryptocurrency failure. Following Shumway (2001) and Campbell et al. (2008), we use a dynamic logit model to estimate the probability of cryptocurrency failure over the next period. A key element of our empirical work is identifying promising variables that predict cryptocurrency failure. Existing studies about corporate failure use both equity market and accounting information (e.g., Shumway, 2001; Chava and Jarrow, 2004; Campbell et al., 2008). In this paper, we use crypto market-based and characteristic-based information as predictors in the logit model. Crypto market-based variables include six standard variables such as the market capitalization, age, past returns, return volatility, illiquidity, and the skewness-related variable. Existing studies show that some of these crypto market-based variables have predictability for the cross section of cryptocurrency returns (e.g., Liu et al., 2022; Bianchi and Babiak, 2022). 9 We consider both short and medium horizons to identify crypto failure. We use the horizon of 26 weeks as a conservative criterion. We also report the results based on the horizon of 4 weeks in this paper. 10 Although some failed cryptocurrencies resurrect after a long period of dormancy, these cryptocurrencies are not much traded and most of them finally become dead. Gandal et al. (2021) examine the coin abandonment and resurrection during the period of February 2014 to February 2018. They find that about 71% of abandoned coins subsequently resurrect. Because tokens become popular from 2017, their estimates of token abandonment and resurrection are conservative. More importantly, cryptocurrency failure in our definition are more severe than abandonment in their definition. In addition, we expect that these failed cryptocurrency due to unethical scams are unlikely to be resurrected later. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

However, unlike stocks, cryptocurrencies have no accounting data. According to the media coverage, security issues, unethical scams, bad publicity, and unclear progression paths of projects are main reasons for cryptocurrency failure. Then we use the metadata from CoinMarketCap to capture the crypto-specific information about product publicity, information disclosure, technical sophistication, and the industry classification. Some of these information is used to predict ICO success and post-ICO performance (e.g., Howell et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Lyandres et al., 2022). For example, the failure of the DAO is a typical example due to security issues.11 A valuable lesson about security issues is the importance of security technology. Liu et al. (2021) construct a measure of the technical sophistication of cryptocurrencies from ICO whitepapers. Because it is impossible to precisely measure the degree of technology sophistication for several thousands of sample cryptocurrencies due to data availability and a large number of sample cryptocurrencies are not issued via ICO in our paper, we simply use the availability of technical document or source code, and the type of consensus algorithm (e.g., PoW) to identify whether a cryptocurrency owns reliable technology.12 Unethical scams are another main reason for cryptocurrency failure. Because of the popularity of buzzwords such as blockchain among ordinary investors over recent years, cryptocurrency Ponzi schemes have been received widespread media coverage. Because these Ponzi schemes have no solid business plans that solve real problems, the failure of 11 An intelligent hacker exploited a loophole in the code written for the DAO only a few months after it emerged in 2016. Unsurprisingly, the hacker attach was the key driver of the failure of the DAO. The platform (i.e., Ethereum) itself has no flaw, but the code written for the DAO that was built on Ethereum had flaws that were vulnerable to attack. 12 Because many cryptocurrencies listing in exchanges do not have whitepapers, we cannot construct the measure of technology sophistication for all sample cryptocurrencies in our study as Liu et al. (2021) do. The information for proxies for technical sophistication in our paper is available in CoinMarketCap for all sample Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

these unethical cryptocurrencies is inevitable. We use the dummy variables, the availability of twitter, type of consensus algorithm, and ICO, to identify whether a cryptocurrency is likely to be a scam.13 In addition, poor publicity is also an important reason for crypto failure. Existing studies document that investor attention proxies significantly forecast future cryptocurrency returns (e.g., Liu and Tsyvinski, 2021; Sockin and Xiong, 2021). We use these dummy variables, the availability of twitter, to identify whether a cryptocurrency is likely to be public to more investors. Empirical results show that these market-based variables, the market capitalization, age, past recent returns, return volatility, and the illiquidity measure, significantly predict coin failure with expected signs. That is, coins that are larger, younger, less volatile, more liquid, or have higher recent returns, are less likely to fail over the subsequent period. In addition, coins with available twitters, technical documents and source codes, and PoW as consensus algorithm are also less likely to fail. Moreover, coins in the infrastructure and payments industries are less likely to fail. Because coins are quite different from tokens in many aspects, some significant predictors for token failure are different from those for coin failure. The market capitalization, age, return volatility and the illiquidity measure are common significant predictors for both coin and token failures. However, the downside risk measure is a significant predictor for token failure. In addition, the proxy for technical sophistication (i.e., the dummy variable source code) and the payments industry dummy significantly predict token failure. Our results are almost consistent as the forecasting horizon increases 13 CoinMarketCap imposes stricter listing criteria in recent years, including that a cryptocurrency must have a functional website block explore and real people behind the project. The purpose of stricter requirements is to mitigate unethical scams, although a fake website or fictitious people under the project could be created. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

from 1 week to 8 weeks. Cryptocurrency failure and the determinants of cryptocurrency failure vary over time. In particular, the introduction of Bitcoin futures in December 2017 is significantly correlated with the subsequently high coin failures possibly because the introduction of Bitcoin futures provides investors a new channel to arbitrage the overpricing, inhibiting extremely optimistic investor sentiment and accelerating the crypto bubble burst in 2018. In contrast, the outbreak of COVID-19 is significantly correlated with fewer crypto failures in 2020 possibly because the stagnant society and economy due to the outbreak of COVID- 19 leads to the crypto boom in 2020. These events have different impact on the role of some specific predictors for coin and token failures. Furthermore, we examine the tradeoff between failure risk and expected return in the cryptocurrency market. Using fitted probability of failure from the dynamic logit model to measure failure risk for each cryptocurrency, we find a positive relation between crypto failure risk and expected return. That is, cryptocurrencies with high (low) fitted failure probability have high (low) returns. The outperformance of cryptocurrencies with high failure risk is quite persistent and cannot be explained by common crypto risk factors. The positive pricing of failure risk in the crypto market is more pronounced among small and Finally, we investigate the economic value of risky crypto assets from the asset allocation perspective. Based on certainty-equivalent return and Sharpe ratio, we find that a mean-variance investor who considers high risky crypto assets in his multi-asset portfolio would receive larger economic gains than the counterpart who invests in only the stock market or risk-free T-bills. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

This paper provides a comprehensive and up-to-date research on the failure risk in the cryptocurrency market, helping us better understand crypto failure risk that is quite important but ignored in existing literature. Cryptocurrencies have astonishingly high failure probability and thus investors suffer from substantial economic losses in this volatile crypto market. Existing studies pay little attention to the failure risk in the crypto market and its determinants and pricing despite high crypto failures, while common risk factors in cryptocurrency, crypto market manipulation, and ICO attract much attention. Our paper complements existing studies by focusing on the determinants and pricing of crypto Specifically, we document some significant and different market- and characteristic- based predictors for coin and token failures. Moreover, the importance of these significant predictors varies over time when some new trading mechanisms are introduced or some global systematic shocks such as COVID-19 arrive. These findings provide important implications for crypto investors who could minimize their investment losses. Moreover, our study contributes to the debate on the default risk-return tradeoff from a novel perspective of cryptocurrency failure. The relation between default or distress risks and expected returns in the stock market is mixed. Building on various measures of default risk, some studies find a positive relation between default risk and expected returns (e.g., Vassalou and Xing, 2004; Chava and Purnanandam, 2010; Friewald, Wagner, and Zechner, 2014; Aretz, Florackis, and Kostakis, 2018), while some other studies document a negative relation (e.g., Dichev, 1998; Griffin and Lemmon, 2002; Campbell et al., 2008; Da and Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Gao, 2010; George and Hwang, 2010).14 Our finding of a positive failure risk-return tradeoff in the crypto market supports the traditional positive risk-return tradeoff theory in Merton (1987), suggesting that investors require high positive premium for bearing high failure risk of crypto assets. The positive premium of failure risk explains why many investors trade in the crypto market despite high failure risk. Our study also contributes to the asset allocation literature on alternative investments. Although cryptocurrencies as an emerging asset are highly risky, our study shows that traditional investors could enjoy substantial economic gains by diversifying some of their wealth into risky crypto assets. No matter whether crypto assets themselves have real value or not, cryptocurrencies are economically valuable for investors from the asset allocation perspective. We emphasize the coexistence of dark side and bright side of crypto assets. Our study sheds novel light on how to avoid the dark side and make use of the bright side. 2. Data Description of Cryptocurrency Failure We obtain trading data and crypto-specific metadata for all sample cryptocurrencies from CoinMarketCap.15 As the most trusted and accurate source of data for cryptocurrencies, CoinMarketCap aggregates information from major cryptocurrency exchanges around the world and provides historical price and volume data and other crypto-specific information. The data from CoinMarketCap is widely used in empirical studies about cryptocurrency 14 In addition, some studies find no relation between default risk and stock returns. Anginer and Yildizhan (2018) show that Fama-French risk factors could explain the high expected returns for stocks with high exposures to systematic default risk. Moreover, some studies reconcile the puzzling relation between default risk and expected returns by considering other factors such as shareholder advantage and shareholder recovery (Garlappi, Shu, and Yan, 2008; Garlappi and Yan, 2011). Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

(e.g., Fisch, 2019; Griffin and Shams, 2020; Howell et al., 2020; Liu and Tsyvinski, 2021; Liu et al., 2022). CoinMarketCap does not cover all cryptocurrencies worldwide. It covers only cryptocurrencies that meet its minimum listing criteria. 16 Many cryptocurrencies issued through ICOs are not listed in CoinMarketCap because they do not meet the minimum listing criteria, and many cryptocurrencies in CoinMarketCap were not issued through ICOs. CoinMarketCap lists both active and inactive cryptocurrencies. To our best knowledge, CoinMarketCap is the most trusted and accurate dataset for us to explore the determinants and consequence of cryptocurrency failure. Our sample period is from January 2014 to December 2020. The data from January 2021 to June 2021 is used to identify whether a cryptocurrency is active or inactive at the end of our sample period (i.e., December 2020). Our sample includes only cryptocurrencies that are newly listed in CoinMarketCap from January 2014 due to data availability and quality in CoinMarketCap. Unlike studies focusing on large cryptocurrencies (e.g., Liu et al., 2022), we complement these studies by examining all large and small cryptocurrencies because of the ex-ante expectation that small cryptocurrencies are more likely to fail. Our final sample includes 2,457 coins and 3,731 tokens. Following Liu et al. (2022), we use daily close price and volume data to construct market-based variables for cryptocurrencies. We consider a comprehensive set of variables, including market capitalization, age, recent past returns, return volatility, the illiquidity measure, and skewness-related measures. See variable definitions in detail in Table A1. To alleviate concerns about extreme values and substantial variations in price and volume in 16 Listings Criteria: https://support.coinmarketcap.com/hc/en-us/articles/360043659351-Listings-Criteria Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

the cryptocurrency market, we winsorize most market-based variables except age and the illiquidity measure by the 5th and 95th percentiles each week. CoinMarketCap also provides rich information about crypto-specific characteristics beyond trading data. The information includes a cryptocurrency’s unique ID, name, symbol, category (i.e., coin or token), slug (i.e., web URL friendly shorthand version of cryptocurrency name), listing date (i.e., timestamp of when the cryptocurrency was added to CoinMarketCap), tags (e.g., consensus algorithm, property, platform, and other), urls (e.g., website, twitter, technical document, and source code), and so on. We use these metadata to construct some dummy variables as proxies for information disclosure and asymmetry, technical sophistication, security, and product publicity. We give a simple description of these variables in Table A1. 2.1 Definition of Cryptocurrency Failure A key element of our empirical analysis is defining cryptocurrency failure. In Campbell et al. (2008), a corporate failure is broadly defined if the firm was bankrupt, its stock was delisted due to financial distress, or its credit rating is default. However, cryptocurrencies are essentially different from firms or stocks. Unlike stocks, there is no official delisting mechanism and credit ratings for cryptocurrencies. It is also difficult to identify whether cryptocurrency-financed projects filed for either Chapter 7 or Chapter 11 bankruptcy when these projects failed. Therefore, from a practical investment perspective, we look at cryptocurrency failure in term of trading activity. In this paper, cryptocurrency failures are defined broadly to include distress, failure and death based on the specified time horizon of inactivity. Specifically, a cryptocurrency Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

is distressed if it has no trading data over the next 4 consecutive weeks in CoinMarketCap. A cryptocurrency is failed if it has no trading data over the next 26 consecutive weeks. A cryptocurrency is dead if it never reappears after failure in CoinMarketCap. From the practical perspective of investors, death is more severe than failure and failure is more severe than distress because the chance for investors to recover their losses is smaller in cases of death and failure. In our sample period, 21.6% of distressed cryptocurrencies subsequently reappeared after a long period, while only 7.3% of failed cryptocurrencies subsequently reappeared after a long period. Moreover, these distressed or failed cryptocurrencies that resurrected after a long period of dormancy are not active in trading volume after resurrection. To some extent, resurrection is meaningless to most investors (especially highly leveraged investors) due to the lack of active trading in the crypto market. In our empirical analysis, we classify failed and dead cryptocurrencies into the same group (i.e., failed cryptocurrencies) because about 93% of failed cryptocurrencies never reappeared in our sample period and it is hard to identify truly dead cryptocurrencies.17 To have a big and clear picture of cryptocurrency failure, we look at both cryptocurrency distress and failure we defined above. Some cryptocurrencies may experience two or three distress or failure events. For example, a failed coin resurrected after a long period (e.g., about 1 year), but it failed again later (i.e., no trading activity in subsequent 26 consecutive weeks) and never resurrected until the end of our sample period. In this case, this coin has two failure events. In the following empirical analysis, we regard the two failure events as independent events. That 17 Cryptocurrencies that failed due to unethical scams are unlikely to resurrect. These failed cryptocurrencies Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

is, we regard the failed coin that resurrected later as a new coin. In fact, these failed coins that resurrected later are less likely to continue to survive well. Investors, especially speculators on these failed coins, are less likely to recover their prior losses even though some of these failed coins resurrect after a long period. 2.2 Cryptocurrency Failure and Economic Consequence Figure 1 shows the numbers of newly listed, active, failed, and total cryptocurrencies each year during 2014 to 2020. A large number of cryptocurrencies are created each year. In particular, over 2,000 new cryptocurrencies are created in 2020. However, a large number of cryptocurrencies also failed each year. The trend of failure is stable over time. Fewer cryptocurrencies failed in 2017 because there is a Bitcoin bubble in 2017. Table 1 reports the number of coin and token failures and their estimated maximum economic losses each year during our sample period. We must note that our estimated number and economic losses of failures are conservative because CoinMarketCap does not cover all cryptocurrencies in the real world. CoinMarketCap lists only cryptocurrencies that meet the minimum listing criteria. Some cryptocurrencies failed before they have the chance to list in CoinMarketCap. Here the number of failures refers to the number of failure events. That is, a failure event occurs if the cryptocurrency has no trading volume for at least 26 consecutive weeks. To some extent, these failed cryptocurrencies are almost dead and investors are less likely to recover their losses from these failures. The maximum loss for a cryptocurrency refers to its historical high of market capitalization. Table 1 reports that over 2,300 failure events during the period of 2014 to 2020 and Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

corresponding economic losses are astonishingly substantial. Specifically, there are totally 1,570 coin failure events and 775 token failure events. There is an upward trend for token failures in time series. A large number of tokens have been created after 2017. In particular, 1,787 new tokens listed in CoinMarketCap in 2020 when the COVID-19 pandemic spread around the world. Token failures dominate coin failures in term of the number of failure events and economic losses in 2020. Because of a bubble in the cryptocurrency market in 2017, there were fewer coin failure events in 2017 and more failure events in 2018 due to the bubble burst in 2018. The estimated total losses of cryptocurrency failures are about 33.6 billion USD during 2014 to 2020, with an average annual loss of 4.8 billion USD.18 Specifically, the estimated total economic losses of coin failures and token failures are about 12.8 and 20.8 billion USD during 2014 to 2020, respectively. The economic loss of each token failure event is larger than that of each coin failure event. On average, investors in aggregate suffer from about $8.15 million in each coin failure event and $26.88 million in each token failure Figure 2 plots the number of coin and token failure events and corresponding cumulative maximum economic losses of these failure events from 2014 to 2020. Economic losses are more pronounced during 2018 to 2020 than during 2014 to 2016 because a large number of tokens failed in recent years and the average loss of each token failure is larger than that of each coin failure. 18 An average daily loss of $13.15 million in our sample is between a conservative estimated daily loss of $9 million and the maximum daily loss of $23 million in cryptocurrency scams in the first two months of 2018 reported in news in Bitcoin.com. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 2 reports the probability that a coin or token will fail in a specified period. We test the conditional probability that a coin or token will be delisted from CoinMarketCap before a specified time horizon in our sample period. The time (0 to 156 weeks) in the column refers to the time period that a cryptocurrency is traded before delisting from CoinMarketCap. The time (4 to 260 weeks) in the row refers to the time period that a cryptocurrency with a given life (that is specified by the time horizon in the column) will fail before a specified period. Note that here a failure refers to death we defined above. For example, 2.41% in [0 week, 4 weeks] in Table 2 refers to that a newly listed coin has 2.41% probability of delisting from CoinMarketCap within 4 weeks. 59/2446 refers to that among 2,446 newly listed coins during January 2014 to December 2020, 59 coins failed within first 4 weeks. When we look at failure probability in a longer horizon, 27.87% in [0 week, 52 weeks] refers to that a newly listed coin has 27.87% probability of delisting within first 52 weeks. 633/2271 refers to that among 2,271 newly listed coins during January 2014 to June 2020, 633 coins failed within first 52 weeks.19 Furthermore, when we look at failure in a 5-year horizon, 862 coins out of 1,075 coins failed within their first 5 years. We find similar results for tokens. These results show that cryptocurrency failure probability increases dramatically as the horizon increases, suggesting that it is highly risky 19 We collect data from CoinMarketCap from January 2014 to June 2021. There are 2,446 newly listed coins in [0 week, 4 weeks] during January 2014 to December 2020. But there are only 2,271 newly listed coins in [0 week, 52 weeks] during January 2014 to June 2020 because the newly listed coins in the denominator of failure probability in [0 week, 52 weeks] must have a life of maximum 52 weeks (i.e., June 2021 backwards to June 2020). Therefore, only newly listed coins during January 2014 to June 2020 are included and newly listed coins during July 2020 to June 2021 are not included in the denominator in [0 week, 52 weeks]. Similarly, there are only 1,075 coins in the denominator in [0 week, 260 weeks] because we need to count coins backwards from June 2021 to July 2016 (i.e., 260 weeks). Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

to invest in cryptocurrencies (especially old coins and tokens) because they are short-lived. Then we examine the unconditional probability that a coin or token will fail within a specified period. Figure 3 shows the cumulative cryptocurrency failure events (based on the future 4-week or 26-week horizon) within a specified period during 2014 to 2020. Overall, the number of failure events based on 4-week horizon (i.e., distress events) is larger than that of failure events based on the 26-week horizon in various specified periods because a failure event requires a stricter criterion on the inactive trading than a distress event. It is obvious that most failed cryptocurrencies failed within first two years. There is no obvious increase in failure event after three years. To get a clear picture of differences between active and failed cryptocurrencies, Table 3 presents summary statistics for active and failed cryptocurrencies. Panel A in Table 3 reports the results for market-based variables. Because of substantial variations in trading prices and market capitalizations, we report the median values across the weeks in the sample of the median values within each week of various market-based variables. There is one week gap between these variables and the failure events. It is apparent that larger coins and tokens are less likely to fail. Failed coins or tokens have worse recent returns, higher return volatility, and downside risk. Active tokens have relatively higher prices than failed tokens. Active coins are older than failed coins possibly due to survival bias, while active tokens are a little younger than failed tokens possibly due to that a large number of new tokens were created in 2020 in our sample and these new tokens are in the early stage of Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Panel B in Table 3 reports the results for crypto-specific dummy variables. Active coins have higher probability of having twitter, source code, and technical document than failed coins. Active coins are more likely to use PoW or hybrid as the consensus algorithm. Active coins have higher percentage of initial coin offerings (ICO) than failed coins. In addition, we also find that failed coins are reluctant to disclose their industry classification, so the number about the main industry dummies for failed coins is very low. These findings suggest that active coins are quite different from failed coins in term of crypto-specific Tokens are different from coins in many aspects. Tokens become popular from 2017. We observe some obvious differences on some variables between coins and tokens. For instance, active tokens have lower probability of having twitter than failed tokens, although the difference is not large. Active tokens have higher probability of having technical document and source code than failed token, although the difference is not large. Active tokens have lower percentage of ICO than failed coins, although the difference is small. In addition, failed tokens are more likely to in the platform Ethereum. Like coins, failed tokens are reluctant to disclose their industry classification. 3. A Logit Model of Cryptocurrency Failure In this section, we explore the factors that predict the cryptocurrency failure. Following Shumway (2001), Chava and Jarrow (2004), and Campbell et al. (2008), we use a dynamic logit model to identify important market-based variables and crypto-specific variables for cryptocurrency failure over the next specified period. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

3.1 A Dynamic Logit Model In this section, we use a dynamic logit model to estimate the failure probability over the next specified period. A dynamic logit model allows us to include both time-varying market-based variables and static crypto-specific characteristics in a regression. Following Campbell et al. (2008), we use the following dynamic logit model: 𝑃𝑡−1(𝑌𝑖,𝑡+1 = 1) = where 𝑌𝑖,𝑡+1 equals to one if there is a failure event in week t+1, and 𝑥𝑖,𝑡−1 refers to a vector of explanatory variables which indicate the known information at the end of week t-1. We skip 1-week between the known information for predictors in week t-1 and the future failure event in week t+1 so that our models are more practically useful. Table 4 reports the logit regression results for various specifications for coin failures. In columns 1 to 4, we report results for coin failure that is determined based on the future 4-week horizon. In the first column, we estimate the model with market-based variables: the market capitalization (MCAP), age (AGE), past 4-week return (RET_4W), return volatility over the past four weeks (RETVOL), the illiquidity measure (ZERO%), and the Column 1 shows that the coefficients of MCAP and RET_4W are significantly negative, and the coefficients of RETVOL and ZERO% are significantly positive. These 20 We also consider the price, beta, return skewness, and the maximum daily return over past 4 weeks in predicting cryptocurrency failure in the dynamic logit models. Because of high correlation between these variables and the chosen market variables in the main models, we include only MCAP, AGE, RET_4W, RETVOL, ZERO%, and NCSKEW as market-based variables. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

results suggest that coins that are larger, have higher recent past returns, or have lower return volatility and illiquidity are less likely to fail in subsequent 1 week. These significant predictors (MCAP, RET, and RETVOL) in the coin market are consistent with those for corporate failure in Campbell et al. (2008).21 It is not surprising that the illiquidity measure, ZERO%, is significantly and positively correlated with the subsequent failure because less frequent trading is a signal of distress. In addition, AGE becomes a significant predictor with a positive sign in column 4 that includes market variables, coin specific characteristics, and the industry classification, suggesting that older coins are more likely to fail.22 In columns 2 and 3, we examine some coin-specific characteristics that are related to information disclosure, technological sophistication, product publicity and marketing, the industry classification. Column 2 shows that the coefficients of dummy variables (twitter, technical document, source code, ICO, PoW, and hybrid consensus algorithm) are negative and significant, suggesting that coins with twitter, technical document, source code, or PoW as consensus algorithm are less likely to fail than their counterparts. These results suggest that coins with better product publicity, more sophisticated technology, or less information asymmetry are less likely to fail than other coins. ICO becomes insignificant in column 4 that includes market variables and industry dummies possibly due to that ICO is highly correlated with MCAP and the industry dummy infrastructure. Column 3 shows that the coefficient of the financial industry dummy is significantly positive and the coefficients of other four industry (infrastructure, media, payments, and 21 The significance of return volatility declines after we add skewness-related variables such as return skewness, maximum daily returns, and downside risk in the regressions because of high correlations among these variables, though these skewness-related variables are not significant. 22 In comparison, Shumway (2001) finds that firm age does not significantly predict firm bankruptcy. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

services) dummies are significantly negative, suggesting that compared to coins in other industries, coins in the financial industry are more likely to fail and coins in the infrastructure, media, payments, or services industries are less likely to fail. The financial, infrastructure, and payments industry dummies are still significant in column 4. Columns 5 to 8 in Table 4 report results for coin failure that is determined based on the future 26-week horizon. We find similar results for coin failures determined based on the future 4-week or 26-week horizons. The only difference is that the financial industry dummy becomes insignificant in predicting failure based on the 26-week horizon, but the sign is still positive. Table 5 reports the logit regression results for various specifications for token failure. Because coins are different from tokens in many aspects, some significant predictors for coin failure are different from those for token failure. We find that some market variables such as MCAP, AGE, RETVOL, and ZERO% are common significant predictors for both coin and token failures in various specifications. However, RET_4W becomes insignificant but NCSKEW as a proxy for the downside risk is significantly and positively correlated with the subsequent token failure. Moreover, only the proxy for technology, source code, is significantly and negatively correlated with token failure (columns 4 and 8). Another proxy for technical sophistication, technical document, becomes insignificant with the expected sign in models that include market variables and industry dummies (columns 4 and 8). These results suggest that the technical sophistication may be the most important ex ante predictor for both coin and token failures. In addition, only the payments industry dummy is significant in predicting token failure in models including market variables and crypto-specific variables (columns Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

4 and 8), although the infrastructure and services industry dummies are also significant in the model with only industry dummies. These results suggest that the payments industry dummy is the only common industry predictor for coin and token failures. In sum, results from dynamic logit regressions show that market variables such as MCAP, AGE, RETVOL, and ZERO%, the proxy for technical sophistication such as the dummy source code, and the payments industry dummy are common significant predictors for both coin and token failures. Because coins are different from tokens in many aspects, some significant predictors for coin failure are different from those for token failure. In our sample period, we document more significant predictors for coin failure than token failure. The Pseudo-R2 in the best specifications for coin failure is 0.133, while the Pseudo-R2 in the best specifications for token failure is 0.084. These results suggest that the dynamic logit model better predicts coin failure than toke failure. The relatively low R2 is not surprising because it is well-known that it is difficult to precisely forecast extreme events such as failure events for highly volatile cryptocurrencies. Following the method in Conrad, Kapadia, and Xing (2014) that forecasts jackpot, we use the ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) curve to assess our model’s accuracy. The ROC curve refers to the graph that shows the true positive rate versus the false positive rate at different classification thresholds. The ROC curves for logistic models in predicting the failure events of coins and tokens are presented in Figure A1. To explicitly assess the model accuracy with a score, we use the AUC (Area Under Curve) that represents the area under the ROC curve. AUC is an important and popular indicator to measure the performance of a classification model, ranging from 0 to 1. The Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

bigger AUC, the more accurate the model.23 In this paper, we use AUC to obtain logistic models' accuracy in predicting crypto distress and failure events. AUC for coin (token) failure events model in Figure A1 is 0.83 (0.79). For comparison, the model in Conrad et al. (2014) has an accuracy ratio of 0.77 in predicting realized jackpot. Overall, our models 3.2 Forecasting at Long Horizons The best specifications at the 1-week horizon capture about 13.3% of the variation in coin failure and 8.4% in token failure. In this subsection, we explore the determinants of cryptocurrency failure over the relatively longer horizons. Because cryptocurrencies are different from public firms and stocks in the lifecycle and short-lived, following Campbell et al. (2008), we estimate the conditional probability of failure over next 4 and 8 weeks.24 The forecasting model is described as follows: where 𝑌𝑖,𝑡+𝑛 equals to one if there is a failure event in week t+n, and 𝑥𝑖,𝑡−1 refers to a vector of explanatory variables at the end of week t-1. Table 6 reports the results for coin and token failures over the next 1, 4, and 8 weeks, respectively. Overall, our results show that these significant predictors over the next 1- week horizon are still significant for coin failure over the next 4- and 8-week horizons. For 23 Typically, an AUC value between 0.7 and 0.8 is considered fair, a value between 0.8 and 0.9 is considered good, and a value above 0.9 is considered excellent (S&P Global Market Intelligence). 24 Because cryptocurrencies are traded 24/7 without the market close, 8 weeks in the crypto market equals about 40 weeks in the stock market in term of trading time. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

example, these market-based variables, MCAP, AGE, RET_4W, RETVOL, and ZERO%, are still significant predictors for coin failure over the next 4- and 8-week horizons. The coefficients and significance levels for only predictors such as MCAP, RETVOL, and ZERO% decline as the horizon increases. In addition, as we would expect, the Pseudo-R2 decreases as the horizon increases. Our results also show that most significant predictors over the next 1-week horizon are also significant predictors for token failure over the next 4- and 8-week horizons. However, some significant variables become insignificant but some insignificant variables become significant as the horizon increases. For example, NCSKEW becomes insignificant over the next 4- and 8-week horizons, while the dummy twitter becomes significant over the next 4-week horizon, the dummy Ethereum becomes marginally significant over the next 8-week horizon, and the infrastructure and services industry dummies also become significant over longer horizons. the Pseudo-R2 does not decrease substantially as the horizon increases, though it is expected to decrease as the horizon increases. We conclude that most significant predictors still perform well in predicting coin or token failures over a relatively longer horizon such as 4- or 8-week horizon. The Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) and the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) introduced Bitcoin futures contracts in December 2017. Many influential crypto exchanges and platforms started to provide Bitcoin futures contracts around the world after 2017. Other cryptocurrency futures have also been launched by various exchanges in recent years. In a volatile ecosystem with wild price swings, Bitcoin futures contracts provide a Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

more regulated and stable environment to hedge exposure against wild price movements. Because of the change in the trading environment, we expect that the introduction of cryptocurrency futures would have significant impact on some predictors for crypto failure. In this subsection, we explore whether and how the introduction of Bitcoin futures affects the determinants of cryptocurrency failure. To evaluate how the introduction of Bitcoin futures affects the determinants of failure in the cryptocurrency market, we include the interactions between this specific event (i.e., the initial Bitcoin futures offerings) and crypto-level variables in the dynamic logit model in the subsection 3.1. We first assess the impact of the introduction of Bitcoin futures in December 2017 on cryptocurrency failure. We expect that more cryptocurrencies would fail in 2018 after the introduction of Bitcoin futures in December 2017 because the Bitcoin bubble was in the peak in December 2017. The introduction of Bitcoin futures contracts provides investors a new channel to arbitrage the overpricing of Bitcoin, inhibiting extremely optimistic investor sentiment and the formation of bubble in the crypto market to some extent. Moreover, the introduction of Bitcoin futures would accelerate the crypto bubble burst subsequently. Some studies argue that the introduction of Bitcoin futures is significantly responsible for the subsequent fall in prices of Bitcoins and several main cryptocurrencies (e.g., Hale et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2020). Column 1 in Table 7 shows that the coefficient of the initial cryptocurrency futures offerings (IFO) for coins is positive and significant, suggesting that the introduction of Bitcoin futures is significantly and positively related to subsequent coin failure probability. This finding suggests that the introduction of Bitcoin futures seems to prevent extremely Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

optimistic investor sentiment. In contrast, column 5 shows that the coefficient of IFO for tokens is negative but insignificant, suggesting that the introduction of Bitcoin futures in December 2017 is not significantly correlated with toke failure probability in 2018 and 2019. One potential explanation is that tokens as an alternative of coins started to become popular in 2017 and more popular in 2018. Given the adverse impact of the IFO on the failure probability in the crypto market, then we evaluate whether and how the introduction of Bitcoin futures affects the role of predictors in predicting cryptocurrency failure. Column 2 in Table 7 shows that the coefficients of the interactions between IFO and AGE, RETVOL, and ZERO% are positive and significant, and the interaction between IFO and RET_4W is negative and significant. These results suggest that the role of coin age, return volatility, and illiquidity in predicting the failure becomes stronger after the introduction of Bitcoin futures. However, the role of recent returns is weakened after the introduction of Bitcoin futures. These results hold when we include crypto-specific dummy variables (column 4) except that the interaction between IFO and RETVOL becomes insignificant with the same sign. Column 3 in Table 7 shows that the coefficients of the interactions between IFO and these dummy variables (technical document, source code, PoW, and hybrid consensus algorithm) are negative and significant, suggesting that the role of these dummy variables becomes weaker after the introduction of Bitcoin futures. The sign and significance of the interaction of between IFO and proxies for technical sophistication (technical document and source code) hold when we include market-based variables (column 4). The results in Table 4 shows that coins with technical document and source code are less likely to fail than coins without them in the full sample period. However, the introduction of Bitcoin Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

futures seems to weaken the role of technical sophistication in predicting coin failure. One potential explanation is that investors may not regard the technology as important when investor sentiment in the cryptocurrency market becomes low after the introduction of Columns 5 to 8 in Table 7 report the results for tokens. In contrast, column 8 shows that the coefficients of the interaction between IFO and MCAP is negative and significant, and the coefficients of the interactions between IFO and AGE and ZERO% are positive and significant, suggesting that token size, age, and illiquidity become more important in predicting token failure after the introduction of Bitcoin futures. In contrast, the coefficients of the interaction between IFO and RET_4W is positive and significant, suggesting that recent returns become less important in predicting token failure after the introduction of Bitcoin futures. These findings show that the importance of market-based predictors for coin failure differs from that of predictors for token failure after the introduction of Bitcoin futures in 2017. Column 8 also shows that only the coefficient of the interaction between IFO and the platform Ethereum is significant and negative, suggesting that the platform as a predictor becomes more important in predicting token failure after the introduction of Bitcoin futures. In contrast, the importance of other token specific predictors such as information disclosure and technical sophistication remains unchanged before and after the introduction of Bitcoin In sum, the introduction of Bitcoin futures in December 2017 has different impact on coin and token failures and the determinants of their failures. The introduction of Bitcoin futures in 2017 seem to have larger impact on coin failures than token failures subsequently Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

possibly due to that the Bitcoin bubble was in the peak in the end of 2017 and tokens become more popular from 2018. In addition, the introduction of Bitcoin futures has larger impact on some predictors for coin and token failures than other predictors. Moreover, the introduction of Bitcoin futures has different impact on predictors of coin and token failures. 3.4 The COVID-19 Pandemic The COVID-19 pandemic has great impact on social and economic activities around the world (e.g., Ding, Levine, Lin, and Xie, 2021; Goldstein, Koijen, and Mueller, 2021). Unlike the adverse impact of the pandemic on most social and economic activities, we observe that more new cryptocurrencies have been offered since 2020 than before 2020. In particular, more than 1,787 new tokens are offered around the world in 2020. Moreover, the ratio of failed to new coins or tokens in 2020 is lower than that in prior years. In this subsection, we explore how the shock of the COVID-19 pandemic affects the failure and the role of predictors for failure in the cryptocurrency market. To evaluate how the COVID-19 pandemic affects the cryptocurrency market, we include the interactions between the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic event and crypto- level variables in the dynamic logit model in the subsection 3.1. We first assess the impact of the outbreak of COVID-19 on cryptocurrency failure. The stagnant society and economy due to the outbreak of COVID-19 leads to the crypto boom. Therefore, we expect a lower failure probability after the outbreak of COVID-19. Column 1 in Table 8 shows that the coefficient of the outbreak of COVID-19 (COVID19) as a dummy variable is negative and significant, suggesting that the outbreak of COVID- 19 is significantly and negatively correlated with the subsequent coin failure. Column 5 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

shows the same result for tokens. Given the positive impact of the COIVD-19 pandemic on the cryptocurrency market, then we evaluate whether and how the outbreak of COIVD-19 affects the role of predictors in predicting failure. Columns 1 to 4 in Table 8 report the results for coins. Column 2 shows that only the coefficient of the interaction between COVID19 and AGE is significant and negative, suggesting that the positive relation between coin age and failure probability is weakened after the outbreak of COVID-19. Column 3 shows that the coefficient of the interaction between COVID19 and the dummy variable twitter is marginally significant and negative, but the coefficient becomes insignificant after we control for market-based variables in column 4. In addition, column 4 shows that the coefficient of interaction between COVID19 and the dummy variable PoW is significant and negative, suggesting that the negative relation between PoW and coin failure probability is weakened by the Columns 5 to 8 in Table 8 report the results for tokens. Column 8 shows that the coefficient of the interaction between COVID19 and RETVOL is significant and negative, suggesting that the positive relation between return volatility and failure probability is weakened by the outbreak of COVID-19. The positive relation between the downside risk proxied by NCSKEW and failure probability is also weakened during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, column 8 shows that the coefficient of the interaction between COVID19 and the dummy variable source code is significant and negative, suggesting that the negative relation between the technical sophistication and failure probability is strengthened during the COVID-19 pandemic. Overall, our results show that the COVID-19 pandemic has significant impact on the Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

failure and the role of some specific predictors in predicting failure in the cryptocurrency The above results show that the market capitalization is a robust and significant predictor for both coin and token failures in various specifications. Liu et al. (2022) document that size is a common risk factor in the cryptocurrency market. Large cryptocurrencies earn lower future returns than small cryptocurrencies. In this subsection, to further check the size effect in the cryptocurrency market, we examine how determinants of cryptocurrency failure vary across different size subsamples. We divide the whole sample into two equal subsamples based on their market capitalizations at the end of each week. We find that most failure events occur among small cryptocurrencies. For instance, there are 90 failure events among large coins, while there are 638 failure events among small coins. We use the dynamic logit model in the section 3.1 to estimate the failure probability in large and small cryptocurrency subsamples. Table 9 reports the results for coin and token failures that are determined based on the future 20-week horizon. For coins, these significant predictors in the full sample are still significant in the subsample of small coins except the infrastructure and payments industry dummies. In contrast, MCAP, RET_4W, and RETVOL become insignificant in predicting coin failure in the subsample of large coins. However, the Pseudo-R2 in the model for large coins is larger than that for small coins. We find similar results for token failure. These significant predictors in the full sample are still significant in the subsample of small tokens, while MCAP, ZERO%, the Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

dummy variable source code, and the payments industry dummy become insignificant in the subsample of large tokens. However, the Pseudo-R2 in the model for large tokens is larger than that for small tokens. Overall, we find that most significant predictors in the full sample are still significant in predicting coin or token failures among small coins or tokens because most failure events occur among small coins or tokens. Similar results hold if we define failures based on the next 4-week horizon. However, the Pseudo-R2 is larger in the subsample of large coins or tokens than in the subsample of small coins or tokens. An unreported table shows similar results if we divide sample coins or tokens into two subgroups of high-priced and low- priced coins or tokens because the market capitalization is highly correlated with price. 4. The Failure Risk-Return Tradeoff in the Cryptocurrency Market In this section, we explore the asset pricing implications of our failure model in the cryptocurrency market. Recent studies on cryptocurrency focus on the pricing of some traditional variables using standard asset pricing methods (e.g., Liu and Tsyvinski, 2021; Liu et al., 2022). No study has explicitly examined the pricing of failure risk in the cryptocurrency market. An examination of the pricing of failure risk in the crypto market sheds novel light on the debate on the default risk-return tradeoff in the financial markets. The relation between default or distress risks and expected returns in the stock market is mixed. Building on various measures of default risk, some studies find a positive relation between default risk and expected returns (e.g., Vassalou and Xing, 2004; Chava and Purnanandam, 2010; Friewald et al., 2014; Aretz et al., 2018), while other studies document a negative relation (e.g., Dichev, 1998; Griffin and Lemmon, 2002; Campbell et al., 2008; Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Da and Gao, 2010; George and Hwang, 2010). In addition, Anginer and Yildizhan (2018) show that Fama-French risk factors could explain the high expected returns for stocks with high exposures to systematic default risk. Xing, Yu, and Zhu (2022) find a positive risk premium for bankruptcy risk but no premium for other-failure risk. In addition, the risk-return tradeoff is different in the stock and bond markets. Bai, Bali, and Wen (2021) find a significantly positive relation between systematic risk and corporate bond returns, while there is no significant relation between idiosyncratic volatility and bond returns. In contrast, there has been a debate on the relation between risks (in particular, measured by idiosyncratic volatility) and returns in the stock market. Bai et al. (2021) provide some evidence that different investor preferences for stocks and bonds explain the different risk-return tradeoffs in the stock and bond markets. In particular, sophisticated institutional investors dominate in the bond market, leading to a positive risk- return tradeoff in the bond market. Because cryptocurrencies and stocks are different in many aspects and the default risk-return relation in the stock market is mixed, we cannot conclude that cryptocurrencies with high failure probability have higher or lower future returns than those with low failure probability. However, explanations for the positive risk-return tradeoff in the bond market in Bai et al. (2021) shed some light on the risk-return tradeoff in the crypto market. We expect a positive failure risk-return tradeoff in the cryptocurrency market for two reasons. First, investors in the cryptocurrency market are more speculative than those in the stock market because cryptocurrencies are more speculative than stocks. Speculative investors in the cryptocurrency market are less likely to diversify their investments. Moreover, it is well known that cryptocurrencies have high failure probability. Therefore, Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

motived by theories that idiosyncratic risk is positively related to expected returns in the cross section in the stock market (e.g., Merton, 1987), we expect that these under- diversified speculative investors require positive returns for bearing high failure risk in the cryptocurrency market. Second, as institutional investors in the bond market, investors in the cryptocurrency market are more sophisticated than common individual investors in the stock market. These more sophisticated investors are expected to require positive returns for bearing high failure risk. Because we do not have data available to identify whether sophisticated investors dominate in the crypto market and these investors hold under- diversified crypto assets, it is ultimately an empirical question in the cryptocurrency market. 4.1 Failure Risk and Expected Return in the Cross Section We adopt the portfolio analysis approach to identify the failure risk-return tradeoff in the cryptocurrency market. We first use the dynamic logit model in the section 3.1 to estimate failure probability for each coin or token using historical data. Specifically, in each week, we use past three-year historical data to estimate the coefficients of significant predictors. The estimated coefficients are updated each week. For example, we use the data from January 2014 to December 2016 to calculate the coefficients of coin predictors in the first week in 2017. Because we use the future 4-week or 26-week information to identify current crypto failure events, the coefficients calculated in the first week in 2017 are used to calculate the estimated failure probability in the fifth week in 2017 to avoid the look- ahead bias. Therefore, the first observation in the out-of-sample evaluation period is the Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

fifth week in 2017 for coins.25 The out-of-sample evaluation period is from February 2017 to December 2020 for coins and November 2017 to December 2020 for tokens. Predictors used in the model for coins include the market capitalization (MCAP), age (AGE), past 4-week return (RET_4W), recent return standard deviation (RETVOL), the illiquidity measure (ZERO%), the downside risk (NCSKEW), and crypto-specific dummy variables (i.e., twitter, source code, technical document, ICO, PoW, and hybrid consensus algorithm). Same predictors are used for tokens expect that the platform dummy (i.e., Ethereum) replaces the two dummy variables (i.e., PoW and hybrid consensus algorithm). Here we do not include industry dummies. It is important to carefully handle the returns to distressed and failed cryptocurrencies. Because most failed cryptocurrencies will not resurrect after a long period of dormancy, we assign a return of -100% to such a failure event. Some distressed cryptocurrencies will resurrect after a period of dormancy, but most resurrected distressed cryptocurrencies are not actively traded. Therefore, we assign a return of -50% or -100% to such a distress event.26 In addition, because the variations in returns to cryptocurrencies are very large and some extreme observations will potentially bias the results, we limit the maximum weekly 25 To use the latest estimated coefficients, we use the future 4-week information to identify current crypto failure events. Our results are consistent if we use the future 26-week information to identify failure events. 26 Most existing studies on cryptocurrency do not consider the adjustment on returns when these cryptos fail. We get very similar results using either -50% or -100% for a distress event. In the main analysis, we report the results based on the distress return of -50%. The results based on the distress return of -100% is available 27 Extreme returns are mainly driven by extremely low-priced cryptocurrencies. Although we use the value- weighted returns in the main analysis, some extreme returns would affect the results to some extent. Good news is that the number of extreme returns is very few. Our results are consistent when various maximum weekly returns (e.g., 300% or 500%) are used. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

We follow the way in Liu et al. (2022) to construct the three factors in the crypto market. Because we examine coins and tokens separately, we construct the size factor (CSMB) and the momentum factor (CMOM) for the coin and token sample, respectively. Liu et al. (2022) show that the mean and standard deviation of the crypto market returns are the same as those of Bitcoin’s returns. Therefore, we use Bitcoin’s returns as a measure of the market factor. When constructing the size and momentum factors in coin or token sample, we also exclude coins or tokens with market capitalizations of less than $1,000,000. Following prior studies such as Campbell et al. (2008), we use the standard portfolio analysis to test the risk-return tradeoff in the cryptocurrency market. We first examine the unconditional relation between distress risk and return for coins or tokens, respectively. We assign all sample coins or tokens into five quintile portfolios based on their estimated failure probabilities.28 These portfolios are hold for 1 week. Table 10 reports the average equal-weighted and value-weighted excess returns and risk-adjusted returns for portfolios of coins or tokens sorted on their estimated failure probabilities (FP). Panel A reports the results for coins. We find that coins with high FP outperform coins with low FP. Specifically, coins in the highest FP quintile portfolio outperform coins in the lowest FP quintile portfolio by an average weekly equal-weighted (value-weighted) excess return of 11.13% (5.28%) with a t-statistic of 9.02 (3.05). The outperformance is robust even after controlling for three crypto factors. Moreover, the outperformance is mainly from coins with high FP. For example, coins in the highest FP 28 In this subsection, we examine the relation between failure risk and expected returns in the whole sample that includes all sample coins or tokens. We do not use the size screen such as $1,000,000 to exclude small cryptos. In the subsection 4.3, we examine the role of crypto characteristics such as size in the failure risk- Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

quintile portfolio have an average value-weighted CAPM alpha of 4.97%, while coins in the lowest FP quintile portfolio have an average value-weighted CAPM alpha of 0.05%. The average excess and risk-adjusted returns monotonically increase with failure probability in term of equal-weighted returns. In contrast, the monotonic relation between failure risk and expected returns does not hold in term of value-weighted returns. However, coins in the highest FP quintile portfolio consistently have much higher expected returns than coins in other quintile portfolios. We find similar results if we sort sample coins into There is no obvious variation in factor loadings across the FP portfolios in term of equal-weighted returns in Panel A of Table 10. All five FP portfolios have positive and significant loadings on the market factor and the size factor, but insignificantly negative loadings on the momentum factor. In contrast, the size loadings increase with the FP portfolios in term of value-weighted returns. The market capitalizations of coins decrease across the FP portfolios. That is, distressed coins are much smaller than safe coins. Overall, excess returns of all FP portfolios are smaller than risk-adjusted returns, suggesting that these crypto factors can partly explain the failure risk-return tradeoff. However, these crypto factors cannot significantly explain the pricing of crypto failure risk. Panel B of Table 10 reports the results for tokens. Overall, we find similar results for tokens. Compared with tokens in other portfolios, tokens in the highest FP quintile portfolio have significantly much higher expected returns. Crypto three factors cannot significantly explain the high and positive expected returns of high failure risk, although abnormal 29 An unreported result shows that coins in the highest FP decile portfolio have extremely high expected Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

returns of high failure risk decrease under the three-factor model. In sum, our results suggest that failure risk is significantly and positively priced in the cryptocurrency market. Common risk factors such as crypto size and momentum factors could not significantly explain the pricing of crypto failure risk. Crypto size and return volatility are two most important characteristics that are related to the pricing of failure risk. Distressed cryptos are much smaller and volatile than safe cryptos. This new finding in the crypto market is against the distress anomaly in the stock market documented in Campbell et al. (2008), while it is consistent with the classical theory that supports a positive risk-return tradeoff in Merton (1987) and the positive risk-return tradeoff in the bond market in Bai et al. (2021). Two potential explanations for the positive risk-return tradeoff in the crypto market are that investors in the cryptocurrency market hold under-diversified portfolios of crypto assets and that these investors are more sophisticated than individual investors in the stocks and they require high positive premium for bearing high failure risk of crypto assets.30 4.2 Failure Risk and Expected Return in Event Time We track the relatively long-term performance of FP portfolios in the subsection 4.1 to better understand the pricing of crypto failure risk. Following Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), we calculate the average portfolio returns for various FP portfolios in each of 12 weeks following the portfolio formation week. This event-time return analysis sheds additional insights on the persistence of the pricing of crypto failure risk and riskiness of 30 We argue that the substantially positive returns of high-FP cryptocurrencies, which eventually do not fail, compensate for the losses of failed cryptocurrencies in a representative investor’s portfolio. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

the trading strategy based on failure risk. Table 11 presents the value-weighted market-adjusted returns of portfolios sorted on estimated failure probability in each of 12 weeks following the portfolio formation week. Coins or tokens in the highest FP quintile portfolio have significantly positive abnormal returns in each of 12 weeks following the portfolio formation week. The return spread between the highest and lowest FP portfolios is significant and positive. The highest FP portfolio has significantly much higher expected abnormal returns than other FP portfolios in event time. Moreover, the magnitude of high returns of the highest FP quintile portfolio does not decay over time, suggesting that the positive pricing of high failure risk is quite persistent. In contrast, coins in the lowest FP quintile portfolio have almost zero abnormal returns in each of 12 weeks following the portfolio formation week. Moreover, tokens in the lowest FP quintile portfolio have large negative abnormal returns in event time. Figure 5 presents the cumulative returns of portfolios with various estimated failure probability. The highest FP quintile portfolio experiences substantial cumulative abnormal returns in the 12-week holding period. 4.3 Crypto Characteristics and the Pricing of Failure Risk The variation in some crypto characteristics across different FP portfolios suggests that some crypto characteristics play an important role in the relation between failure risk and expected returns. Because some characteristics such as size and return volatility are significant predictors for crypto failure, it is not surprising that the pricing of crypto failure risk varies across crypto characteristic portfolios. Campbell et al. (2008) show that the distress anomaly in the stock market varies across characteristic groups. We examine the Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

extent to which crypto characteristics affect the pricing of crypto failure risk. To explore the role of crypto characteristics in the pricing of failure risk, we use the double-sorting portfolio analysis as in Campbell et al. (2008). For example, we first equally divide sample coins into three portfolios based on their market capitalizations. Then within each size portfolio, we assign coins into five quintile portfolios based on their estimated failure probability. The portfolios are hold for 1 week. We report the average value- weighted market-adjusted returns for these double-sorted portfolios. Table 12 reports the results. The positive relation between failure risk and expected return is more pronounced among smaller coins. The return spread between the highest and lowest FP portfolios is 7.02% per week (t-statistic is 3.82) in the subsample of small coins, compared to the return difference of 4.92% (t-statistic is 2.96) in the whole sample. In contrast, the return spread is -1.36% (t-statistic is -1.63) in the subsample of large coins. These results suggest that holding large coins with relatively high FP does not have positive risk premium. On average, large coins have relatively lower estimated failure probability and much lower returns than small coins. We find similar results for tokens. We also find that high expected returns of high failure risk are more pronounced among coins or tokens with poor recent past returns. Moreover, the expected returns monotonically increase across FP portfolios only in the subsample of coins or tokens with poor recent past returns. In contrast, we find no such a positive relation between failure risk and expected returns among coins with good recent past returns. Moreover, high-FP tokens have large negative abnormal returns in the subsample of tokens with good recent past returns. These results show that the monotonically positive relation between failure risk and expected is concentrated among past losers. On average, past losers do not have Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

significantly higher estimated failure probability than past winners. The high positive premium of failure risk is more pronounced in the subsample of cryptos with high recent return volatility. Moreover, the monotonically positive relation between failure risk and expected returns also exists only in the subsample of cryptos with high recent return volatility. In contrast, there is no obvious relation between failure risk and expected returns in the subsample of cryptos with low recent return volatility. These results suggest that arbitrage costs may be a potential explanation for the positive premium of high failure risk in the crypto market. There is no obvious age effect in the pricing of failure risk for coins. High FP coins regardless of age have significantly higher positive expected abnormal returns, while other coins do not have high abnormal returns. In contrast, the positive premium of failure risk is more pronounced among young tokens than among old tokens, although high FP tokens still have higher expected returns than low FP tokens among old tokens. In sum, the positive tradeoff between crypto failure risk and expected returns is more pronounced among cryptos that are small and have poor recent performance and high recent return volatility. Cryptos with such characteristics are more likely to fail based on the results from the dynamic logit models for failure. 4.4 Additional Analysis and Discussion 4.4.1 Direct Trading Costs Trading costs account for the profitability of most stock market anomalies (Novy- Marx and Velikov, 2016). Therefore, trading costs may be a main concern about the Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

implementability and real profitability of the strategy based on crypto failure risk. Like Liu et al. (2022), we focus on long-only strategies and long-short strategies. There are two main reasons for the concern about trading costs for our strategies. First, the long leg includes very small cryptos that may have high trading fees and bid-ask spreads. Second, there may be a lack of availability of cryptos shorted and high shorting fees. In our opinion, direct trading costs may not be a big concern. It is difficult to precisely measure trading fees and bid-ask spreads for small cryptos in our sample. Trading prices and trading fees are quite volatile in the cross section and time series in the crypto market.31 Assuming that small cryptos in the long leg have ten times the trading fees and bid-ask spreads for the largest 20 coins mentioned in Liu et al. (2022), the long-only strategies are still profitable. For example, the returns of the long leg are still larger than relatively conservative trading costs of 5%. The event-time return analysis suggests that investors could buy and hold cryptos in the long leg for a longer time to mitigate the concern about trading costs. Moreover, trading fees and bid-ask spreads quickly declined in recent years. For the long-short strategies, it is easier and less costly to short Bitcoin than cryptos in our short legs in recent years (Liu et al., 2022). Therefore, shorting costs could not be a big concern for the implementability and profitability of the long-short crypto failure risk- based strategies. Moreover, because the profitability of the long-short failure risk-based strategies is mainly driven by the long leg, investors could focus on the long-only strategies. 31 DataTrek Research provides some examples of transaction fees for cryptocurrencies. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 12 shows that the highly positive premium of high failure risk is concentrated among high-volatile and small cryptos. These findings are consistent with the argument about limits to arbitrage in Shleifer and Vishny (1997) and Pontiff (2006). The main arbitrage risk such as short-sale constraints could be mitigated by focusing on the long- only strategies in our setting because the profitability of the long-short strategies is mainly from the long leg. A natural question arises: why arbitrageurs do not arbitrage high returns of high-FP cryptos immediately? Figure 7 presents the time series of excess returns and crypto market-adjusted returns of coins or tokens in the highest FP quintile portfolios. There are many times of negative returns in term of excess or market-adjusted returns in time series. Because many investors in the cryptocurrency market have high leverage and hold un-diversifiable crypto portfolio, high frequency of negative returns of high-FP cryptos in time series is high arbitrage costs To further assess the economic value of the crypto failure risk, we examine the performance of trading strategies that combine high failure risk cryptocurrencies with the stock market and the risk-free asset from an asset allocation perspective. Following Rapach, Strauss, and Zhou (2010) and Ferreira and Santa-Clara (2011), we calculate the certainty equivalent return (CER) gain and Sharpe ratio for these trading strategies. A better strategy has higher CER and Sharpe ratio. Suppose a mean-variance investor with the relative risk aversion parameter A who allocates her wealth into a risk-free asset (i.e., T-bill) and N risky assets (i.e., coins or tokens, Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

and the stock market; N = 2) with returns 𝑅𝑓 and 𝑅.32 The investor chooses a proportion of 𝑤𝑗 to invest in risky asset j (here j = 1, 2). The portfolio is rebalanced weekly. His 𝑅𝑝= 𝑤′𝑅+ (1 −𝑤′1𝑁)𝑅𝑓= 𝑅𝑓+ 𝑤(𝑅−𝑅𝑓) Let 𝑟= 𝑅−𝑅𝑓 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 𝜇 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑐𝑜𝑣𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 ∑ , The problem is to find the optimal w to maximize his expected utility in next period, 𝑤 𝐸[𝑈 (𝑅𝑝)] = 𝐸[𝑈 (𝑅𝑓 + 𝑤 (𝑅 − 𝑅𝑓))] The optimal portfolio weight is Here we limit the weight for cryptocurrencies and the stock market to the range from 0 to 1 so that the trading strategy is more practical for normal investors. Then the CER of the portfolio is The CER gain is the difference between the compensation to the investor who invests 32 In this section, we focus on coins and tokens in the highest failure probability quintile portfolio defined in the section 4. That is, we only consider these high-FP coins and tokens because these high-FP cryptos have Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

in high failure risk crypto assets, the stock market, and the risk-free asset and the compensation to the investor who invests only in the stock market and the risk-free asset. The out-of-sample evaluation period is from January 2019 to December 2020 for both coins Table 13 reports the annualized CER gains and Sharpe ratio, and portfolio weights for various optimal portfolios hold by a mean-variance investor with different degree of risk aversion. Transaction cost for stocks is set at 50 bps per week. Because direct and indirect transaction costs for coins and tokens are larger than those for stocks, we consider the transaction cost of 500 bps, which are conservative or large enough even for small coins and tokens in recent years. Our results show that the CER gains can still be large even after we adjust for relatively conservative transaction costs, suggesting that the mean-variance investor could obtain substantial economic gains by additionally investing in high failure risk, coins and tokens, on top of the stock market and the risk-free asset. For example, the annualized CER gain is 11.60% for the portfolio including high failure risk coins when the risk aversion is 15. In addition, the portfolios including high failure risk crypto assets deliver attractive Sharpe ratio, which could be 1.84 in the case of coins. The CER gain and Sharpe ratio are also economically significant for portfolios that allocate capital into tokens. The CER gain and portfolio weights are sensitive to the degree of risk aversion. As for crypto assets, they are unlike traditional financial assets and investors may have ambiguity aversion regarding these emerging crypto assets on top of the usual risk aversion. Therefore, it seems reasonable to assume that investors consider the ambiguity aversion together with the usual risk aversion when they allocate capital into ambiguous assets such Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

as crypto assets in our setting. More specifically, according to Trojani and Vanini (2004), a risk aversion of 10 and ambiguity of 5 would be considered as equivalent to a risk aversion of 15 approximately. Although the CER gain can be very large when risk aversion is relatively low, the corresponding portfolio weight assigned to high risky crypto assets tend to be too high. For example, when the risk aversion is 3, the weight on coins is as large as 0.34. When taking into account the high risk and ambiguity aversion together, the effective risk aversion can become as large as 15. The corresponding optimal weight on coins decreases to 0.07.33 This is the case for token as well. The relatively small weight of 7% on high risky crypto assets looks more reasonable and reflects that investors recognize the high risk, such as the high failure risk in our setting, plus the ambiguity associated with Overall, these results suggest that mean-variance investors should diversify some of their wealth into crypto assets because investing in the crypto market provides substantial economic value from an asset allocation perspective. The crypto market seems to be a good complement to traditional financial markets. Moreover, our results also show that mean- variance investors seem quite rational and allocate a relatively small weight on high risky crypto assets possibly because these crypto assets are high risky, including the high failure risk documented in this paper, and ambiguous to them. 33 Figure A2 shows the time series of optimal weights on crypto assets (coins and tokens) and the stock market from 2019 to 2020. 34 For simplicity, we do not assume difference risk aversion coefficients for stocks and crypto assets. However, we admit that for stocks, the ambiguity can be much smaller than crypto assets. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

This paper aims to examine the failure risk in the cryptocurrency market that is largely ignored by the literature. We show that cryptocurrencies have astonishingly high failure probability that may lead to substantial economic losses for investors in this unregulated crypto market. We document some significant market-based and characteristic-specific predictors for crypto failure. Some significant predictors for coin failure are different from those for token failure. Moreover, the importance of these predictors varies over time. The introduction of Bitcoin futures and the outbreak of COVID-19 significantly affect the significance of some predictors . Moreover, our study shows that the relation between failure risk and expected return is positive. The outperformance of cryptocurrencies with high failure risk is quite persistent and cannot be explained by common crypto risk factors. The positive crypto failure risk- return tradeoff suggests that crypto investors require a return premium for bearing high failure risk of crypto assets. In addition, we show that cryptocurrencies can generate sizable economic gains for investors from the asset allocation perspective. Overall, we show both the apparent dark side (high failure risk and corresponding large economic losses) and potential bright side (high economic gains associated with high failure risk) of crypto assets, that seem a good complementary to the existing literature on Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Anginer, Deniz, and Celim Yildizhan, 2018, Is there a distress risk anomaly? Corporate bond spreads as a proxy for default risk, Review of Finance 22, 633-660. Amiram, Dan, Evgeny Lyandres, and Daniel Rabetti, 2022, Competition and Product Quality: Fake Trading on Crypto Exchanges, Working paper. Aretz, Kevin, Chris Florackis, and Alexandros Kostakis, 2018, Do stock returns really decrease with default risk? new international evidence, Management Science 64, Bai, Jennie, Turan G. Bali, and Quan Wen, 2021, Is there a risk-return tradeoff in the corporate bond market? Time-series and cross-sectional evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 142, 1017–1037. Bianchi, Daniele, and Mykola Babiak, 2022, A Factor Model for Cryptocurrency Returns, Böhme, Rainer, Nicolas Christin, Benjamin Edelman, and Tyler Moore, 2015, Bitcoin: Economics, Technology, and Governance, Journal of Economic Perspectives 29, Campbell, John Y., Jens Hilscher, and Jan Szilagyi, 2008, In search of distress risk, Journal of Finance 63, 2899–2939. Chava, Sudheer, and Robert A. Jarrow, 2004, Bankruptcy prediction with industry effects, Review of Finance 8, 537–569. Chava, Sudheer, and Amiyatosh Purnanandam, 2010, Is default risk negatively related to stock returns? Review of Financial Studies 23, 2523–2559. Cong, Lin William, Xi Li, Ke Tang, and Yang Yang, 2021, Crypto Wash Trading, Working Conrad, Jennifer, Nishad Kapadia, and Yuhang Xing, 2014, Death and jackpot: Why do individual investors hold overpriced stocks? Journal of Financial Economics 113, Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Da, Zhi, and Pengjie Gao, 2010, Clientele change, liquidity shock, and the return on financially distressed stocks, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45, 27– Dhawan, Anirudh, and Tālis J. Putniņš, 2022, A new wolf in town? Pump-and-dump manipulation in cryptocurrency markets, Review of Finance, Forthcoming. Dichev, Ilia D., 1998, Is the risk of bankruptcy a systematic risk? Journal of Finance 53, Ding, Wenzhi, Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie, 2021, Corporate immunity to the COVID-19 pandemic, Journal of Financial Economics 141, 802–830. Ferreira, Miguel A., and Pedro Santa-Clara, 2011, Forecasting stock market returns: The sum of the parts is more than the whole, Journal of Financial Economics 100, 514– Fisch, Christian, 2019, Initial coin offerings (ICOs) to finance new ventures, Journal of Business Venturing 34, 1–22. Foley, Sean, Jonathan R. Karlsen, and Talis J. Putnins, 2019, Sex, drugs, and Bitcoin: How much illegal activity is financed through cryptocurrencies? Review of Financial Friewald, Nils, Christian Wagner, and Josef Zechner, 2014, The cross-section of credit risk premia and equity returns, Journal of Finance 69, 2419–2469. Gandal, Neil, J. T. Hamrick, Tyler Moore, and Tali Oberman, 2018, Price manipulation in the Bitcoin ecosystem, Journal of Monetary Economics 95, 86–96. Gandal, Neil, J. T. Hamrick, Tyler Moore, and Marie Vasek, 2021, The rise and fall of cryptocurrency coins and tokens, Decisions in Economics and Finance 44, 981–1014. Garlappi, Lorenzo, Tao Shu, and Hong Yan, 2008, Default risk, shareholder advantage, and stock returns, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2743–2778. Garlappi, Lorenzo, and Hong Yan, 2011, Financial Distress and the Cross-section of Equity Return, Journal of Finance 66, 789-822. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

George, Thomas J., and Chuan-Yang Hwang, 2010, A resolution of the distress risk and leverage puzzles in the cross section of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics Goldstein, Itay, Ralph Koijen, and Holger Mueller, 2021, COVID-19 and Its Impact on Financial Markets and the Real Economy, Review of Financial Studies 34, 5135-5148. Griffin, John M., and Michael L. Lemmon, 2002, Book-to-market equity, distress risk, and stock returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2317–2336. Griffin, John M., and Amin Shams, 2020, Is Bitcoin really untethered? Journal of Finance Hale, Galina, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Marianna Kudlyak, and Patrick Shultz, 2018, How Futures Trading Changed Bitcoin Prices, FRBSF Economic Letter, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. Howell, Sabrina T, Marina Niessner, and David Yermack, 2020, Initial coin offerings: Financing growth with cryptocurrency token sales, Review of Financial Studies 33, Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers: Implications for Stock Market Efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65- Li, Tao, Donghwa Shin, and Baolian Wang, 2021, Cryptocurrency Pump-and-Dump Liu, Yukun, Jinfei Sheng, and Wanyi Wang, 2021, Technology and Cryptocurrency Valuation: Evidence from Machine Learning, Working paper. Liu, Yukun, and Aleh Tsyvinski, 2021, Risks and Returns of Cryptocurrency, Review of Financial Studies 34, 2689–2727. Liu, Yukun, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Xi Wu, 2022, Common Risk Factors in Cryptocurrency, Journal of Finance 77, 1133-1177. Liu, Ruozhou, Shanfeng Wan, Zili Zhang, and Xuejun Zhao, 2020, Is the introduction of futures responsible for the crash of Bitcoin? Finance Research Letters 34, 101259. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Lyandres, Evgeny, Berardino Palazzo, and Daniel Rabetti, 2022, Initial Coin Offering (ICO) Success and Post-ICO Performance, Management Science, forthcoming. Merton, Robert C., 1987, A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete information, Journal of Finance 42, 483–510. Novy-Marx, Robert, and Mihail Velikov, 2016, A Taxonomy of Anomalies and their Trading Costs, Review of Financial Studies 29, 104-147. Pontiff, Jeffrey, 2006, Costly arbitrage and the myth of idiosyncratic risk, Journal of Accounting and Economics 42, 35-52. Rapach, David E., Jack K. Strauss, Guofu Zhou, 2010, Out-of-Sample Equity Premium Prediction: Combination Forecasts and Links to the Real Economy, Review of Financial Studies 23, 821–862. Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance Shumway, Tyler, 2001, Forecasting bankruptcy more accurately: A simple hazard model, Journal of Business 74, 101–124. Sockin, Michael, and Wei Xiong, 2021, A Model of Cryptocurrencies, Working paper. Trojani, Fabio, and Paolo Vanini, 2004, Robustness and Ambiguity Aversion in General Equilibrium, Review of Finance 8, 279-324. Vassalou, Maria, and Yuhang Xing, 2004, Default Risk in Equity Returns, Journal of Xing, Yuhang, Yan Yu, and Xiaorui Zhu, 2022, Zooming in on Distress Risk: Bankruptcy vs. Other Failures, Working paper. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Figure 1: Active and Failed Cryptocurrencies This figure presents the number of new, active, and failed cryptocurrencies each year during year 2013 to 2020. A crypto failure event occurs if the cryptocurrency has no trading data over the next 4 consecutive weeks (Event4W) or 26 consecutive weeks (Event26W) in CoinMarketCap. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Figure 2: Number of Cryptocurrency Failures and Economic Losses This figure presents the number of failure events and economic losses for coins and tokens each year of the sample period of 2014 to 2020. A failure event occurs if the cryptocurrency has no trading data over the next 26 consecutive weeks in CoinMarketCap. A cryptocurrency’s economic loss is estimated as the maximum market capitalization within its whole life. Panel A: Number of Failure Events Panel B: Economic Losses Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Figure 3: The Cumulative Cryptocurrency Failure Events This figure presents the cumulative cryptocurrency failure events based on the future 4-week (Event 4W) or 26-week horizon (Event 26W) within a specified period during 2014 to 2020. These specified periods include the first 4 weeks (4W), 8 weeks (8W), 13 weeks (13W), and so on. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Figure 4: Correlation Matrix This figure shows the Pearson correlations among market-based and crypto-specific variables that are used in the dynamic logic models. The definition of these variables is in Table A1. Panel A: Correlation Matrix for Coins Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Panel B: Correlation Matrix for Tokens Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Figure 5: Long-Term Performance of Portfolios based on Failure Probability This figure shows cumulative excess and crypto market-adjusted returns for portfolios of coins or tokens sorted on estimated failure probability (FP) after portfolio formation. The holding period is 12 weeks after portfolio formation. At the end of portfolio formation week, we assign all sample coins or tokens into five quintile portfolios based on their FP. P1, P3, and P5 includes coins or tokens with lowest, middle, and highest FP, respectively. P5_P1 buys P5 and shorts P1. The holding period is from February 2017 to December 2020 for coins and November 2017 to December 2020 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Figure 6: Time Series of Estimated Failure Probability across Size Terciles This figure shows the time series of failure probability (FP) estimated from dynamic logit models across size terciles. We first assign all sample coins or tokens into three size tercile portfolios based on their market capitalization at the end of formation week. Then within each size portfolio, we assign coins or tokens into five FP quintile portfolios based on their estimated FP. P1 (P5) refers to the portfolio of coins or tokens with the smallest (largest) FP. P5S (P1S), P5M (P1M), and P5L (P1L) refers to the portfolio including coins or tokens with the largest (smallest) estimated FP within small, middle, and large size tercile portfolio, respectively. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Figure 7: Time Series of Performance of High-FP Portfolios This figure presents the time series of excess and crypto market-adjusted returns of portfolios with the highest estimated failure probability (FP). P5_EX refers to excess returns for high-FP cryptos; P5_MKT refers to crypto market-adjusted returns for high-FP cryptos. P5 refers to the quintile portfolio including top 20% of the highest FP cryptos defined in Figure 5. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 1: The Number and Economic Losses of Cryptocurrency Failure This table presents the numbers of new and total cryptocurrencies listed in CoinMarketCap, and the number of cryptocurrency failure events and their total economic losses (in millions of U.S. dollars) each year during the period of 2014 to 2020. A failure event occurs if the cryptocurrency has no trading data for at least 26 consecutive weeks during the sample period. The maximum loss for a cryptocurrency refers to its historical high of market capitalization (in millions of U.S. dollars). Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 2: Cryptocurrency Failure Probability This table presents the probability that a coin or token will fail in a specified period. The rows indicate the amount of period for which the cryptocurrency is listed in CoinMarketCap. The columns indicate the time period that determines the probability of a cryptocurrency becoming delisted from CoinMarketCap. Panel A reports the ratio of the number of failed coins to the total coins in the specified period. Panel B reports the ratio of the number of failed tokens to the total tokens in the specified period. The sample period is from 2014 to 2020. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 3: Summary Statistics This table presents summary statistics for active, distressed, and failed groups of cryptocurrencies. Panel A reports the median of the median values within each week of various variables for active, distressed, and failed groups of coins and tokens. These variables include the market capitalization (MCAP), the age (in weeks), the past 4-week return (RET_4W), the return volatility (RETVOL), the illiquidity measure (ZERO%), and the measure of downside risk (NCSKEW). Panel B reports the percentage of various dummy variables for active, distressed, and failed groups of coins and tokens. The sample period is from January 2014 to December 2020. Panel A: Market variables Panel B: Crypto-specific variables Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 4: Dynamic Logit Regressions of Coin Failure Indicators on Predictor Variables This table reports results from dynamic logit regressions of coin failure indicators on predictor variables. The sample period is from 2014 to 2020. T-statistics are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significant at 1%, 5%, or 10%, respectively. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 5: Dynamic Logit Regressions of Token Failure Indicators on Predictor Variables This table reports results from dynamic logit regressions of token failure indicators on predictor variables. The sample period is from 2014 to 2020. T-statistics are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significant at 1%, 5%, or 10%, respectively. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 6: Forecasting at Long Horizons This table reports results from dynamic logit regressions of coin and token failure indicators on lagged predictor variables. The sample period is from 2014 to 2020. T-statistics are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significant at 1%, 5%, or 10%, respectively. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 7: The Impact of Bitcoin Futures on Cryptocurrency Failure This table reports results from dynamic logit regressions of coin or token failure indicators on predictor variables including the interactions between the initial Bitcoin futures offerings (IFO) and predictors. The sample period is from January 2016 to December 2019. T-statistics are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significant at 1%, 5%, or 10%, respectively. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

D(Technical doc) * IFO D(Source code) * IFO Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 8: The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Cryptocurrency Failure This table reports results from dynamic logit regressions of coin or token failure indicators on predictor variables including the interactions between the outbreak of the COVID-19 Pandemic (COVID19) and predictors. The sample period is from July 2019 to June 2020. T-statistics are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significant at 1%, 5%, or 10%, respectively. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

D(Technical doc) * COVID19 D(Source code) * COVID19 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 9: Size Effect This table reports results from dynamic logit regressions of coin and token failure indicators on predictor variables in different size subsamples. We first equally divide sample coins or tokens into two subsamples of large and small coins or tokens based on their market capitalizations at the end of formation period. The sample period is from 2014 to 2020. T-statistics are in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significant at 1%, 5%, or 10%, respectively. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 10: Returns on Failure Probability-Sorted Portfolios This table reports the average equal-weighted and value-weighted returns to portfolios of coins or token sorted on their estimated failure probability (FP). Excess returns refer to raw returns in excess of risk-free T-bill rates. CAPM alphas refer to cryptocurrency market-adjusted returns. 3-factor alphas refer to three-factor (market returns (CMKT), size (CSMB), and momentum (CMOM)) adjusted returns. At the end of each week, we divide all sample coins or tokens into five quintile portfolios based on each cryptocurrency’s estimated failure probability. P1 (P5) includes coins or tokens with lowest (highest) FP. The portfolios are hold for 1 week. The holding period is from February 2017 to December 2020 for coins and November 2017 to December 2020 for tokens. We use the Bitcoin’s returns to measure the crypto market returns. This table also reports the mean estimated failure probability (FP) in percentage, market capitalization (MCAP) in millions of U.S. dollars, mean age (AGE) in weeks, mean return standard deviation (STD) and downside risk (NCSKEW) for each portfolio. Newey and West (1987) adjusted t-statistics are in parentheses. Equal-weighted Portfolio Three-factor Regression Coefficients Value-weighted Portfolio Three-factor Regression Coefficients Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Equal-weighted Portfolio Three-factor Regression Coefficients Value-weighted Portfolio Three-factor Regression Coefficients Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 11: Performance of Failure Probability-Sorted Portfolios in Event Time This table reports the value-weighted cryptocurrency market-adjusted alphas for portfolios of coins or tokens sorted on their estimated failure probability (FP) in each week following the formation week. We assign sample coins or tokens into five quintile portfolios based on each cryptocurrency’s estimated failure probability. P1 (P5) includes coins or tokens with lowest (highest) FP. P5-P1 refers to the zero-investment portfolio that buys coins or tokens in P5 and sells coins or tokens in P1. Week t is the week after portfolio formation. The holding period is from February 2017 to December 2020 for coins and November 2017 to December 2020 for tokens. Newey and West (1987) adjusted t-statistics are in parentheses. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 12: Failure Risk-Return Tradeoff for Different Characteristics This table reports the value-weighted cryptocurrency market-adjusted alphas for portfolios of coins or tokens sorted on their estimated failure probability (FP) within each characteristic portfolio. We first assign all sample coins or tokens into three tercile portfolios based on each crypto characteristic. Then within each characteristic portfolio, we assign coins or tokens into five quintile portfolios based on their FP. P1 (P5) includes coins or tokens with lowest (highest) FP. The portfolios are hold for 1 week. The holding period is from February 2017 to December 2020 for coins and November 2017 to December 2020 for tokens. We use the Bitcoin’s returns to measure the crypto market returns. Failure probability for each portfolio is in percentage. Newey and West (1987) adjusted t-statistics are in parentheses. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table 13: Asset Allocation: CER and Sharpe ratio This table reports the CER gains, Sharpe ratios, and portfolio weights of a mean-variance investor with risk-aversion A = 3, 9, or 15 by allocating her wealth weekly into crypto assets (coins or tokens), the stock market and the risk-free asset relative to allocating wealth into the stock market and the risk-free asset. CER gain is the annualized CER difference between the three-asset portfolio including crypto assets, the stock market, and the risk-free asset, and the two-asset benchmark portfolio including the stock market and the risk-free asset. The portfolio weights for two risky assets in the three-asset portfolio are estimated recursively using data available at the forecast formation week t. Sharpe ratio is the annualized average portfolio excess return divided by its standard deviation. Transaction cost for the benchmark (three-asset including coins or tokens) portfolio is fixed at 50 (500) bps per week. The out-of-sample evaluation period for coins and tokens is from January 2019 to December 2020. Panel A: Portfolio including coins, the stock market, and the risk-free asset Panel B: Portfolio including tokens, the stock market, and the risk-free asset Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Table A1: Variable Definitions Market capitalization is measured by the natural logarithm of the total market value of a cryptocurrency (a cryptocurrency's price times circulating supply) at the end Age is measured by the natural logarithm of the number of weeks since the cryptocurrency is newly listed in CoinMarketCap at the end of week t-1. The cumulative return over the week t-4 to week t-1. Total return volatility is estimated using the daily returns over the week t-4 to week The illiquidity measure is the ratio of the number of days without trading data to the total number of days during week t-4 to t-1. Following Chen, Hong, and Stein (2001), the downside risk is calculated by taking the negative of the third moment of daily returns, and dividing it by the standard deviation of daily returns raised to the third power. A dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if a cryptocurrency has a twitter and 0 otherwise. Information about twitter is obtained from ’twitter username’ in A dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if a cryptocurrency has a technical document (e.g., white paper or yellow paper) and 0 otherwise. Information about technical document is obtained from ’urls/technical doc’ in metadata. A dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if source code of project is available and 0 otherwise. The availability of source code is obtained from ’urls/source code’ in A dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if the cryptocurrency has the experience of offerings and 0 otherwise. A dummy variable that is equal to 1 when the consensus algorithm of blockchain beneath coin is Proof-of-Work (PoW) and 0 otherwise. PoW is obtained from ’tags’ A dummy variable that is equal to 1 when the blockchain beneath coin allows for both PoW and PoS as consensus algorithm and 0 otherwise. Hybrid-pow-pos is obtained from ’tags’ in metadata. A dummy variable that is equal to 1 if Ethereum is listed as token platform and 0 otherwise. Information about platform is obtained from ’platform’ in metadata. A dummy variable that is equal to 1 when the property tag is categorized as finance industry based on methodology of Messari Classifications and 0 otherwise. Property tags of infrastructure applications are obtained from ’tags’ in metadata. A dummy variable that is equal to 1 when the property tag is categorized as infrastructure industry based on methodology of Messari Classifications and 0 A dummy variable that is equal to 1 when the property tag is categorized as media industry based on methodology of Messari Classifications and 0 otherwise. A dummy variable that is equal to 1 when the property tag is categorized as payment industry based on methodology of Messari Classifications and 0 A dummy variable that is equal to 1 when the property tag is categorized as services industry based on methodology of Messari Classifications and 0 otherwise. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Figure A1: The Accuracy Ratio This figure shows the dynamic logit model’s accuracy in predicting crypto failures. The ROC curve is the graph that shows the true positive rate against the false positive rate at various classification thresholds. The AUC (Area Under Curve) represents the area under the ROC curve. AUC ranges from 0 to 1. The bigger the AUC, the more accurate the classification model. Panel A: The ROC Curve for Coin Failure Events Panel B: The ROC Curve for Token Failure Events Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

Figure A2: Portfolio Weights This figure shows the optimal portfolio weights of coins, tokens, and the stock market for a mean- variance investor with a risk aversion of 15 as in Table 13. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4164139

---NEW PAPER---

© The Author(s) 2024. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the mate- rial. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​ Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 The rise and fall of cryptocurrencies: defining the economic and social values of blockchain technologies, assessing the opportunities, and defining the financial and cybersecurity risks of the Metaverse This study examines blockchain technologies and their pivotal role in the evolv- ing Metaverse, shedding light on topics such as how to invest in cryptocurrency, the mechanics behind crypto mining, and strategies to effectively buy and trade cryptocurrencies. While it contextualises the common queries of "why is crypto crash- ing?" and "why is crypto down?", the research transcends beyond the frequent market fluctuations to unravel how cryptocurrencies fundamentally work and the step-by- step process on how to create a cryptocurrency. Contrasting existing literature, this comprehensive investigation encompasses both the economic and cybersecurity risks inherent in the blockchain and fintech spheres. Through an interdisciplinary approach, the research transitions from the fundamental principles of fintech investment strate- gies to the overarching implications of blockchain within the Metaverse. Alongside exploring machine learning potentials in financial sectors and risk assessment meth- odologies, the study critically assesses whether developed or developing nations are poised to reap greater benefits from these technologies. Moreover, it probes into both enduring and dubious crypto projects, drawing a distinct line between genu- ine blockchain applications and Ponzi-like schemes. The conclusion resolutely affirms the staying power of blockchain technologies, underlined by a profound exploration of their intrinsic value and a reflective commentary by the author on the potential risks Keywords:  Blockchain technologies, Cryptocurrencies, Metaverse, Decentralised finance (DeFi), Crypto regulations, Blockchain standards, Risk, Value In recent years, cryptocurrency has emerged as a significant and often contentious component of the financial landscape. This article delves deep into the complex world of digital currencies, clarifying the methods of investing in these volatile assets and the intricate mechanisms of crypto mining vs crypto staking. We explore the various 1 Department of Computer Sciences, University of Oxford, 2 Department of Engineering Sciences, University of Oxford,

Page 2 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 platforms and methodologies for purchasing cryptocurrency, whilst also casting insights on the frequent price fluctuations observed in the market, analysing both the techni- cal and external factors leading to periodic crashes and downturns. To provide a com- prehensive understanding, the underlying technology that powers these digital tokens is broken down, offering insights into the decentralised nature of blockchain-based assets. This study navigates the steps and challenges involved in creating a new cryptocurrency and guide readers through the intricacies of trading and maximising potential returns in This article provides an up-to-date assessment of the current state of cryptocurren- cies, examining both their values and associated risks within the realm of blockchain technology. With the exponential growth of over 20,000 crypto projects, the study offers a snapshot of the landscape in 2023, tracing the historical trajectory from Satoshi’s ground-breaking paper on decentralised blockchains to the present day. The study clarifies the distinctions between cryptocurrencies and blockchain technologies while exploring pertinent research questions: Is blockchain technology an innovation or an obsolete concept? What significant risks do cryptocurrencies entail? Are the potential societal and economic benefits worth pursuing? In light of the immense growth observed in the crypto market, encompassing over 20,000 projects, this investigation offers a timely snapshot of the landscape in 2023 while providing a historical account from the seminal work of Satoshi on decentralised blockchains to the present day. The study objectives extend beyond merely examining values and risks associated with cryptocurrencies; we also aim to delineate the nuances distinguishing cryptocurrencies from blockchain technologies. Guided by a series of research questions, we seek to ascertain the nature of blockchain technology as either an innovation or an outdated concept, identify significant risks posed by cryptocurrencies, evaluate their potential value to society and the economy, and determine which coun- tries are likely to benefit the most from these technologies. Additionally, we endeav- our to shed light on the survivability prospects of various blockchain projects, thereby addressing whether the allure surrounding them is hype or a substantial opportunity. While acknowledging the presence of numerous fraudulent crypto ventures, often func- tioning as Ponzi schemes, our focus primarily lies in exploring the genuine use cases of blockchain projects. Ultimately, this research study culminates in a resolute affirmation that blockchain technologies are here to stay, substantiated by an extensive discussion of their intrinsic value. Furthermore, we re-evaluate vital risks, including a personal state- ment from the author regarding the perils faced by individual investors. This article has been around 13 years in the making. I started writing this article back in 2009, with the emergence of Bitcoin (Nakamoto 2008). The report is influenced by points of view that existed before 2009 and have long been forgotten, such as the fear of Bitcoin (BTC) legality, the ethics of decentralised control, and the ‘ethical impact of cryptocurrencies as morally beneficial, detrimental, and ambiguous’ and the ‘antiso- cial use for shadow banking and transactions in the ‘dark net’ and cryptocurrencies’ effect on inflation and deflation’ (Dierksmeier and Seele 2018). Although some of these viewpoints have subdued, and cryptocurrencies are legal to own and operate in many

Page 3 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 countries, many of these fears remain among early adopters. The article discusses the values and risks of a few selected Blockchain projects based on real-world value and their potential to contribute to the future of society. The main research areas reviewed in this study are included in Fig. 1, which also helps visualise the main areas of interest in the year 2023 in the Metaverse concept. Historical overview of Blockchain technologies The first whitepaper on Bitcoin emerged at the peak of the financial crisis in 2008 (Naka- moto 2008) and it promoted the idea of a different economic system that is not depend- ent on a trusted third party. In 2009, the main concern was the legality of such currencies and projects. Bitcoin was considered a mechanism for criminals and drug dealers to bypass the legal banking system. Between 2020 and 2022, investment in cryptocurren- cies (crypto) exploded. Despite the collapse of Terra Luna, the FTX exchange in 2022, and the overall downturn in the market for crypto, crypto investments have continued. Cryptocurrencies, or digital assets, serve as virtual currencies underpinned by cryp- tography, offering heightened security and privacy measures. They often operate decen- tralised, distinguishing them from traditional forms of money. Notably, a defining characteristic of cryptocurrencies is their purported immunity to governmental or insti- tutional control. However, the validity of this claim is subject to debate, as the poten- tial for a single government, such as the United States, or a dominant institution, like BlackRock, to acquire a controlling stake in a cryptocurrency undermines this principle. It is crucial to recognise that while Bitcoin remains the most widely recognized crypto- currency, numerous other cryptocurrencies exist in the market. Cryptocurrencies can facilitate the purchase of goods and services and are actively traded on various online platforms. It is worth noting, however, that none of these platforms are subject to com- prehensive regulation. This regulatory vacuum presents a unique opportunity for coun- tries like the UK, which seek to establish their presence internationally, particularly in light of recent challenges stemming from the impacts of Covid-19 and Brexit. One argument for pursuing Cryptocurrencies as a solution to financial risk is ‘that the main indicators to improve financial development should enhance the process of Fig. 1  Overview of the research topics discussed

Page 4 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 bank lending and equity market development’ (Mikhaylov et al. 2023) Second argument is that smart contracts and metaheuristic can help with securing the quality-of-service and even help with the ‘cost-efficient scheduling of medical-data processing’ (Khan, et al. 2021), which seems of crucial importance for the medical systems in the UK—after the Covid shock to the National Health Service (NHS) (Chang and Park 2020; Pranggono and Arabo 2021; Ting et al. 2020). In summary, pursuing cryptocurrencies as a solution to financial risk is supported by the potential to improve economic development indicators, such as bank lending and equity market development, while simultaneously addressing crucial challenges in the healthcare sector. By harnessing the capabilities of smart contracts and metaheuristic techniques, cryptocurrencies offer opportunities for enhancing the quality-of-service and cost-efficiency of medical data processing, which is of utmost importance for the UK’s healthcare systems in the aftermath of the Covid-19 pandemic. These advance- ments can potentially bring about transformative changes, promoting financial stability and bolstering the resilience of the healthcare sector. Brief history of cryptocurrencies Cryptocurrencies (crypto) are digital assets, or more precisely, a set of digital curren- cies that emerged with the release of Bitcoin in 2009.1 As of January 2021, there are over 4,000 in circulation, some cryptos with minimal trading volume (or not at all). Cryp- tocurrencies are traded as digital ‘tokens’ or ‘coins’ on a distributed and decentralised ledger. Bitcoin leads on market capitalisation, but other cryptos are trying to break into the market by providing different and improved services to Bitcoin. Some of the other cryptos—also known as ‘altcoins’, i.e., all cryptocurrencies other than Bitcoin—are used to create a decentralised financial system, e.g., Ethereum,2 with the ability to han- dle more transactions, e.g., Dogecoin,3 or just use different consensus algorithms, e.g., Fig. 2  Comparison of search trends on some of the most popular cryptos (data from 2020—before the last prominent bull run in crypto)

Page 5 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 Cardano.4 Cryptocurrencies remain highly volatile, and without central control, a single statement by Elon Musk has been sufficient to trigger a spike in search trends (as seen in Fig. 2) and attract significant interest in news media. Although the search trends can spike about specific cryptos, i.e., Bitcoin and Dogecoin in Fig. 2, a dynamic equicorrelation (Bouri et al. 2021) shows a contagious correlation (a mutual relationship or connection) effect between cryptocurrencies (i.e., when Bit- coin crashes, altcoins follow), and the exact relationship is also connected between Bit- coin and NASDAQ. This disincentivises diversification into multiple cryptocurrencies, but a more robust analysis with a value-at-risk (Malhotra 2017; FAIR 2017; Jorion 1997; Khorshidi and Ghezavati 2019; Buith 2016) and expected shortfall must be computed to confirm this. Looking at the spikes in search trends after the announcement from Elon Musk on Bitcoin purchase and comparing them to the price cap of Bitcoin and Doge- coin, it almost resembles a specific behaviour in crypto markets. The user behaviour in some crypto (e.g., Ethereum) appears more stable. In con- trast, the behaviour of users in Bitcoin seems more speculative, with fluctuations based on market trends, followed by more considerable sell-outs when the market is down (Aspembitova et al. 2021). This is not to say that influential people cannot manipulate the stock market, but the point here is that stock market investors are protected by regu- lations which don’t yet exist in crypto markets. Figure 3 shows that ‘interest over time’ has generally changed for Bitcoin and Crypto- currencies—including Altcoins. While the interest in Google Trends for Bitcoin peaked in the 2018 bull run, the interest in cryptocurrencies, as a search trend, has increased (to a new 100%) in the 2021 bull run. Fig. 3  Interest over time: Bitcoin vs Cryptocurrencies (including Altcoins)

Page 6 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 Crypto users can be categorised according to their actions and resources, e.g., fortune, hunter, and idealist (Breidbach and Tana2021). Still, the bigger question is, can we clas- sify cryptocurrencies into taxonomies and forecast individual Altcoin categories’ future success or failure? Another important topic discussed in this article is related to cryp- tocurrencies, the idea of Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDCs) (Reserve and “Cen- tral Bank Digital Currency (CBDC)”, 2022; Hansen and Delak 2022; Cheng 2022), and Friedrich von Hayekʼs theory of private money, which some experts argue could lead to national currencies being replaced by ‘the currency of the digital platform’ (Mikhaylov 2021). Another point on centralisation is that even cryptocurrencies that are meant to be very decentralised, such as Ethereum (ETH), and stablecoins, such as UDSC, can be (in reality) very centralised and potentially controllable. Research questions and structure The research aims, objectives, questions, and goals motivating this article can be defined in one sentence as the current and future values and risks associated with blockchain projects. The areas of focus encouraging this study include: 1.	 To assess the potential of blockchain technology as a catalyst for innovation in future iterations of the internet and Web3 and to determine whether it represents a cutting- edge technology or an outdated concept in the context of financial invention. 2.	 To comprehensively analyse and evaluate the risks associated with cryptocurren- cies, including but not limited to market volatility, security vulnerabilities, regulatory challenges, and potential illicit activities, to understand the risk landscape within 3.	 Investigating and identifying the intrinsic values derived from cryptocurrencies, considering their potential impact on financial systems, economic growth, financial inclusion, transaction efficiency, and transparency, thus contributing to understand- ing their value proposition within financial innovation. 4.	 Conduct a thorough analysis of different blockchain projects and their underlying technologies to identify critical factors that contribute to their long-term viability and survival in the dynamic landscape of financial innovation, thereby providing insights into the sustainability of blockchain projects. 5.	 To explore and identify blockchain projects that have the potential to further the development and advancement of already developed countries’ financial systems, addressing specific areas such as efficiency, security, transparency, financial inclu- sion, and regulatory compliance, thus providing valuable insights into the role of blockchain in enhancing financial innovation in advanced economies. 6.	 To examine and identify blockchain projects that can foster development and pro- gress in developing countries, taking into consideration their unique challenges and needs, including financial inclusion, access to capital, remittances, land registries, supply chain management, and government services, thereby contributing to the understanding of how blockchain can drive financial innovation in developing econ- 7.	 To critically evaluate the feasibility and implications of regulating cryptocurrencies and blockchain projects, including both national and international regulatory frame-

Page 7 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 works, to assess the potential benefits, challenges, and trade-offs associated with effective regulation in the context of financial innovation. This research objective seeks to contribute to the ongoing discourse on appropriate regulatory approaches for cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology. The article follows a traditional (standard) structure, starting with chapter one (1) Introduction, chapter two (2) Methodology, then (3) the research engages with a Case study review of secondary data sources, and compliments the case study with a new chapter (4) that comprises a survey review. The article ends with a chapter (5) discussion Given that the US has already started crafting new regulations on cryptocurrencies (Reserve and “Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC)”, 2022) and after the markets col- lapsed in 2022, the European Union also started catching up with rules (HMT 2023) the UK recently started initial consultation plans to regulate cryptocurrencies (HMT 2023). It is difficult to determine if the proposed methods are positive or negative. Still, the consultation generally builds upon previous HM Treasury proposals on stablecoins. If the plan is to develop a UK stablecoin (USD and GBR), the talk could prove positive for ensuring stability in cryptocurrency markets. However, the proposed regulation suggests that cryptocurrencies should be overseen by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), and not all crypto is just a simple cryptocurrency. Ethereum (for example) is a virtual computer and can perform far more tasks than just transact payments. The consultation also suggests that all UK-based cryptocurrency firms should have anti-money launder- ing and KYC processes. This can be managed in the UK, but the regulation ignores that cryptocurrencies are designed to bypass such rules. The effectiveness of this regulation remains questionable, but it could help stabilise and legalise the trade of cryptocurren- cies in the UK. In other words, these regulations could apply to large companies com- pliant with many different rules. Still, it’s difficult to see how such laws would prevent money laundering on non-UK-based cryptocurrency firms. Structure and novelty of the research study This study offers a multifaceted exploration of blockchain technologies, investigat- ing their economic, social, and wider implications within the Metaverse. The research highlights key themes from blockchain’s impact across sectors to the fintech revolu- tion. Contrasting with existing literature, this work broadens the discussion from the mechanics of cryptocurrency trading to the wider ramifications of blockchain, empha- sising its financial and cybersecurity risks. The novelty of the research is further under- scored by its interdisciplinary approach, merging the fundamental principles of fintech investment strategies, blockchain, and the metaverse. Such a comprehensive perspec- tive positions this study uniquely, complementing and enriching the current academic discourse on cryptocurrency trading, machine learning potentials in financial sectors, and financial risk assessment methodologies. The research not only provides insights into the evolving digital landscape but also sets a new benchmark for future investiga- tions at the crossroads of finance, technology, and societal constructs. Then, the study

Page 8 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 investigates whether developed or developing countries stand to gain more from these technologies and which blockchain projects are likely to endure in the long term. This review acknowledges the prevalence of dubious crypto projects, delving into the realm of Ponzi schemes yet ultimately shifting the focus towards the practical applications of blockchain projects. The study concludes with a resolute assertion that blockchain technologies are here to stay, supported by a comprehensive discussion of their inherent value. Moreover, the article reassesses critical risks, including a personal reflection from the author on the potential risks’ individual investors face. In this article, we present a robust research methodology, employing a combination of the case study method, survey review, and literature review to delve into the dynamic realm of financial innovation and its social implications. Drawing inspiration from established and time-tested guidelines such as Eisenhardt’s ’Building Theories from Case Study Research’ (Eisenhardt1989), Yin’s recommendations on case study research, design, and methods (Charmaz 2006), and the principles of Grounded theory (Yin 2009), and the Grounded theory (Charmaz 2006; Glaser and Strauss 1967; Christina. Goulding 2002) Fig. 4, provides a visual representation of the structured methodology, delineat- ing areas of interest and focus. Our research methodology is thoughtfully divided into a dual emphasis on economic and social values. Recognising that assessing values, risks, and impact extends beyond purely economic metrics, we aim to elucidate the interplay between financial and social considerations. A prominent concern driving the exploration of Web3 arises from the challenges posed by Web2, particularly regarding diminishing personal privacy. Web2 sceptics advocate for a transition to Web3 not solely for its decentralised financial framework but also for its potential to enhance individual privacy. Embracing Blockchain technologies in the Web3 design, along with the integration of virtual and augmented (mixed) reality in education, fosters opportunities for improved personal privacy, decentralised social media, and global community building of like-minded individuals. By adopting this methodological approach, we aspire to offer a coherent and under- standable analysis of the intricate landscape of financial innovation, elucidating the role of Web3 in addressing critical issues and shaping the future of finance, privacy, and Fig. 4  The case study method and the study objectives

Page 9 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 social interactions. Through a multidimensional lens, we aim to contribute valuable insights into the potential benefits and challenges of embracing Web3, shedding light on its transformative impact on the digital landscape. Since the initial search on the Web of Science and Scopus didn’t result in many records on the topics discussed in Fig.  4, the search was expanded into a broader review of Google Scholar, IEEE, and other libraries. Although the initial stages focused on new technologies, the study expanded into the literature on ethics, trading, gambling, decen- tralised finance, and the Metaverse after the initial search. The primary data collection included 20 case study interviews and three workshops. The secondary data collection included new and emerging forms of data (NEFD) that pre- sent new records of value in IoT-based intelligent contracts, including open data—(e.g., Open Data Institute); spatiotemporal data; high-dimensional data; time-stamped data; real-time data and big data. To analyse NEFD, the data collection strategy in this article applied stratified sampling and random sampling for comparative analysis of collected Contextualising this study with the existing body of literature This section is focused on contextualisation of the findings and the novelty of the work in this study. This section compares the differences and similarities, including the find- ings and novelty, of this work, with eight articles closely related to the research area investigated in this study. This study started with a systematic review of existing studies that used data records obtained from the Web of Science Core Collection (Xu et  al. 2019), focusing on the broad landscape of blockchain’s impact across sectors, highlighting key themes from economic benefits to the fintech revolution. Within this body of literature, this study on "The Rise and Fall of Cryptocurrencies" offers a complex and interesting exploration, delving deep into the intricacies of cryptocurrency and the broader implications in the metaverse. This article not only complements the identified themes but goes a step fur- ther by elucidating the financial and cybersecurity risks associated with blockchain tech- nologies. This in-depth focus on the metaverse and its associated challenges underlines the novelty of this work, positioning it as a pivotal piece that bridges gaps in the current literature and offers fresh insights into the evolving digital realm. This study delves into the intricacies of blockchain technologies, highlighting their economic and social values while scrutinising opportunities and risks inherent to the metaverse. In juxtaposition to the comprehensive survey on cryptocurrency trading by Fan Fang et al. (2022) this work holds significance. While Fang and colleagues exten- sively map out the landscape of cryptocurrency trading, from sentiment-based research to the public nature of blockchain technology, our study on exploration underscores broader implications, particularly in relation to the metaverse’s opportunities and chal- lenges. This positions this new article uniquely, as it extends the dialogue beyond the mechanics of trading to the ramifications of blockchain technologies in shaping our digi- tal futures. This new investigation into the metaverse, an area not deeply touched upon

Page 10 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 by Fang et al., accentuates the novelty and contemporaneity of this research, presenting a holistic view that complements and augments existing literature. In the broader discourse surrounding the implications of cryptocurrencies, this study delineates the multi-dimensional societal and economic repercussions of blockchain innovations, setting an expansive stage to understand their systemic influences. By con- trast, the research on "Forecasting and trading cryptocurrencies with machine learning under changing market conditions" (Sebastião and Godinho 2021) offers a deep dive into the predictive and profit-centric paradigms of these digital assets, specifically focusing on machine learning’s applicability in this domain. The convergence of these studies is particularly enlightening. While the former casts a wide net, encompassing the multifac- eted socio-economic interplays and the emergent realm of the metaverse, the latter drills down, examining the nuances of cryptocurrency trading amidst volatile market condi- tions. The overarching narrative of "The Rise and Fall of Cryptocurrencies," when viewed in tandem with the in-depth findings on ML’s potential and challenges in deciphering cryptocurrency markets, offers a synergistic understanding. It enriches the academic conversation, providing a holistic and multi-layered exploration of the cryptocurrency ecosystem, from its foundational technologies to the Metaversal futures they portend. In the contemporary milieu of group decision-making processes, the study titled "Soft consensus cost models for group decision-making and economic interpretations" (Zhang et al. 2019) provides a robust foundation for understanding the nuances and costs of consensus-building among experts. This work unravels the complexity of striking a bal- ance between achieving consensus and incurring associated costs with the introduction of the novel concept of soft minimum cost consensus. Their findings not only advance previous models but also delve into the economic underpinnings of such consensus mechanisms. Within this context, this study on "The Rise and Fall of Cryptocurrencies" emerges as a novel contribution to the discourse. This investigation transcends the tradi- tional realms of consensus-building in decision-making contexts and dives deep into the multifaceted world of cryptocurrencies and the burgeoning metaverse. It not only seeks to define the intrinsic economic and social values underpinning blockchain technolo- gies but also aspires to critically assess the opportunities and challenges presented by the metaverse. The novelty of this work lies in its ability to contextualise and intertwine the foundational principles of consensus models, as observed in the prior study, with the intricate dynamics of blockchain technologies. By comparing the core tenets of group decision-making and the rapidly evolving world of digital assets, this study offers fresh insights and sets a new precedent for interdisciplinary research in this domain. In the dynamic world of financial technology, the pivotal research "Fintech investments in European banks: a hybrid IT2 fuzzy multidimensional decision-making approach" (Kou et al. 2021) pedantically evaluates the essence of Fintech investments in European banking services, elucidating key criteria and offering indispensable insights into opti- mal investment alternatives. Notably, the emphasis on payment and money-transferring systems as paramount Fintech investment alternatives presents a foundational bench- mark in the industry. Within this rich tapestry of Fintech investigations, "The Rise and Fall of Cryptocurrencies: Defining the Economic and Social Values of Blockchain Tech- nologies and Assessing the Opportunities, and Risks of the Metaverse" offers an inno- vative and integrative exploration of blockchain technologies and their interplay with

Page 11 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 the metaverse. By seamlessly weaving the threads of cryptocurrencies’ economic and social values, this research transcends the conventional boundaries of financial technol- ogy discussions and ventures into the evolving realms of the Metaverse. The novelty of this study is underscored by its multidisciplinary approach, integrating the core tenets of Fintech investment strategies with the multifaceted nuances of blockchain and the metaverse. In doing so, it not only complements existing works but also carves a distinct niche in contemporary financial and technological scholarship, presenting fresh vistas and research trajectories in the interplay of Fintech, blockchain, and virtual realms. In comparison with the research on the "Integrated Cluster Detection, Optimization, and Interpretation Approach for Financial Data," (Li et al. 2022) which concentrates on the identification and interpretation of clusters within financial data to enhance deci- sion-making processes, this study on cryptocurrencies offers a broader perspective. Where the former employs sophisticated methodologies to discern patterns in vast financial datasets, emphasising adaptivity, speed, and interpretability, our exploration into the realm of cryptocurrencies and the metaverse endeavours to contextualise these innovations within the larger socio-economic canvas. The novelty of our investigation lies in its interdisciplinary approach, bridging the gaps between finance, technology, and social constructs and presenting a holistic understanding of the current digital trans- formation. Thus, while the study offers invaluable tools for immediate financial data interpretation, our research equips readers with a comprehensive understanding of the evolving landscape of blockchain technologies and the metaverse, forecasting potential trajectories and their implications on our collective future. This study casts a discerning eye on the emergent dynamics of blockchain technolo- gies, pivoting on their socio-economic implications and the opportunities and risks they introduce in the digital realm of the metaverse. When compared with the study titled "Machine Learning Methods for Systemic Risk Analysis in Financial Sectors," (Kou et al. 2019) which delves into the potent intersections of machine learning and systemic risk within the financial sphere, our research offers a more expansive vista, encompassing not just the financial but also the societal reverberations of digital currencies and vir- tual spaces. While the referenced article meticulously maps the deployment of machine learning techniques in gauging financial systemic risk, underscoring the power of big data, network, and sentiment analyses in this quest, our study pivots on the broader implications and trajectory of blockchain and the metaverse. The novelty of our research resides in its comprehensive purview, encapsulating not just financial but also socio-cul- tural and technological dimensions. While the surveyed work offers invaluable insights into the detection and modulation of systemic risks through machine learning, our arti- cle contextualises cryptocurrencies and the metaverse within the evolving tapestry of our digital age, seeking to foretell and shape the contours of this transformation. For a final contextualisation of the findings and novelty of the work in this study, we need to emphasise that in this study, the multifaceted impacts, and prospects of block- chain technologies, with a particular focus on cryptocurrencies, are scrutinised within both socio-economic dimensions and the expanding horizon of the metaverse. Con- textualising this work against the study titled "Evaluation of clustering algorithms for financial risk analysis using MCDM methods," (Kou et al. 2014) which meticulously dis- sects the application of multiple criteria decision-making methods in ranking clustering

Page 12 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 algorithms for financial risk analyses reveals notable distinctions. While the latter delves deep into the computational methodologies employed to enhance precision in financial risk evaluation, our investigation spans a broader spectrum, exploring the underpin- nings of blockchain’s socio-economic repercussions and the metaverse’s potential. The innovative aspect of our work lies in its amalgamation of technological, financial, and social dynamics within the realm of cryptocurrencies and the Metaverse. Conversely, the compared article offers a deep technical dive into the optimisation of clustering algo- rithms for targeted financial outcomes. In essence, while both pieces contribute valuably to the discourse on financial systems and risk, they illuminate different facets— one the technical intricacies and the other a comprehensive socio-economic and technological Decentralised finance is at present isolated to Blockchain projects. Still, most of the existing financial instruments can be transferred into an alternative economic infra- structure with the help of Blockchain Oracles (Kumar et al. 2020). Decentralised finance transactions can be cleaner than traditional finance and support ‘local climate adapta- tion planning and implementation’ (Sharma et al. 2014). This was a natural progression, given that digital finance and renewable energy consumption have already been studied for economic growth and technological progress, with evidence from China (Yu et al. 2022). Blockchain and digital finance have also been the subject of other studies (Dong et al. 2018). Especially the ‘risk of blockchain technology in Internet finance supported by wireless network’ (Chen et al. 2020). It has been almost half a decade since the Blockchain was suggested as the new ‘secure, decentralised, trusted cyber infrastructure solution for future energy systems’ (Dong et al. 2018). One of the solutions proposed in 2019 was the new concept for improving industry with private capital in China, with renewables finance and investment (Liu and Chu 2019). However, these concepts are not immune to the earlier problems related to ‘the governance of local infrastructure funding and financing’ (O’Brien and Pike 2015), especially the role of mitigating the effect of the recession. As the authors stated in 2015, ‘austerity and the fiscal consolidation of public finances have reinforced govern- ment efforts to reduce expenditure and debt, and secure private sector engagement and resources (O’Brien and Pike 2015). Blockchain values are also studied in decentralised electricity access developed with private investment as a sustainable development finance business model (Falchetta et al. 2022). There are various platforms for decentralised autonomous organisations (Faqir- Rhazoui et  al. 2021), even in just one of the existing blockchains, such as Ethereum. Many new Blockchains, such as Algorand, Cardano, Solana, and Avalanche, are emerg- ing daily. The most interesting are the new Blockchains with cross-chain operability, such as Cosmo, Polkadot, and Chainlink. There are also numerous ‘automated market makers and decentralised exchanges’ (Mohan 2022), some even for cryptocurrency trad- ing (Fang et al. 2022). The question is, do the new regulations ‘provide legal certainty’ (Linden and Shirazi 2023)? The proper form of decentralised finance will always be based on private investment. Still, solid regulations and guidance also support centralisation in financial instruments.

Page 13 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 Before transferring traditional instruments into a new system, we must analyse ‘the return–volume relationship in decentralised finance’ (Chu et al.2023). Although decen- tralised banking is not an entirely accepted model yet, even in the present adoption stage, digital banks ‘can learn from decentralised finance’ (Yavin and Reardon 2021). The European Union has recently advanced into new Blockchain regulations based on the ‘Regulation on Market in Crypto-Assets’ and ’Decentralised Finance—MiCA’ (Maia and Vieira dos Santos 2021). The United States has also produced new regulations (Reserve and “Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC)” 2022; Hansen and Delak 2022; Barrett et al. 2017), and the United Kingdom is slowly catching up (HMT 2023). However, the countries that can benefit the most from new financial instruments are not the EU, the US, and the UK. Developing African countries have been very flexible in adopting Blockchain projects, as recorded in the recent study on ‘Decentralised Finance and Cryptocurrency Activ- ity in Africa’ (Ozili 2022). The values from Blockchain projects and new Metaverses do not have to be purely financial. For example, Blockchain projects have been ‘empowering school-based management through decentralised financial control’ since 2008 (Maris- hane and Botha 2008). Despite these best efforts, even in 2023, we are still working on the ‘conceptualisation and outlook’ of ‘decentralised finance platform ecosystems’ (Eik- manns et al. 2023). This is predominately because Blockchain projects, and decentralised finance, have been advancing and developing in various areas. One example is creating an asset-backed decentralised finance instrument for food supply chains in the livestock export industry (Miller et al. 2023). Another example is the ‘decentralisation on health-related equity’ for the ‘decentral- ised governance of health care’ (Sumah et al. 2016). The most critical example is from the Monetary and Economic Department, which discusses the ‘potential benefits and challenges of the new system and presents a comparison to the traditional system of financial intermediation’ (Makarov and Schoar 2022). This signals that decentralised finance is becoming a mainstream topic. Case Study Review: Case studies of existing Blockchain solutions Blockchain 3.0 and Web 3.0 Blockchain technology, initially introduced through Bitcoin, combines cryptography with distributed computing, both of which have existed for several decades. Blockchain 1.0 represents a distributed secure database where a network of computers collaborates and shares data. In this architecture, individual computers, acting as network nodes, val- idate transactions and propagate them to other network nodes, creating a blockchain. Blockchain relies on a distributed consensus algorithm, requiring agreement among different nodes before any alteration can be made. The interdependence of blocks is achieved through hash values, making it virtually impossible to delete a block without affecting the entire chain. The evolution of blockchain technology has led to Blockchain 2.0, exemplified by Ethereum, which introduces the capability to execute any computer code on the sys- tem, essentially creating a distributed virtual computer. This advancement opens the doors to various applications, envisioning a decentralised Turing-complete virtual machine. Blockchain 2.0 enables the creation of decentralised ledgers for asset registries,

Page 14 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 encompassing physical and intangible assets, such as property, currencies, patents, votes, identity, and healthcare data. It replaces the need for multiple private databases with a shared, trusted database accessible by all relevant parties. The immutability of data stored on a blockchain enhances its credibility, as it is incredibly challenging to alter Despite the potential of existing blockchain solutions, they are often considered ineffi- cient and face scalability issues, leading to the emergence of the third generation, Block- chain 3.0. Prominent examples of this generation include IOTA and Dfinity. Blockchain 3.0 introduces "The Distributed Cloud," a pivotal infrastructure supporting the develop- ment of the next generation of the internet, also known as Web 3.0 or the decentral- ised web. A broader ecosystem of technologies is required, including advanced web data analytics and the Internet of Things (IoT). This integration of technologies enables the storage and analysis of vast amounts of sensitive data, unlocking new value and insights through cross-correlations from diverse IoT data sources integrated into the blockchain. The actual value of IoT data lies not in making individual devices or systems bright, but in enabling seamless processes across domains, organisations, and procedures. This necessitates open networks capable of communicating and coordinating components on demand. Blockchain 3.0 and Web 3.0 mark a paradigm shift from ownership to "Serviti- zation," where assets are used as services rather than owned outright. This shift requires the establishment of frictionless markets and automated exchanges, with the blockchain acting as the trust machine, ensuring secure and transparent transactions. In summary, the case study review demonstrates the evolution of blockchain technol- ogy from its initial implementation in Bitcoin (Blockchain 1.0) to Ethereum and other platforms (Blockchain 2.0) and the ongoing development of Blockchain 3.0 solutions. These advancements present new opportunities for decentralisation, enhanced data ana- lytics, and the integration of IoT, culminating in Web 3.0. By embracing these technolo- gies, we can transition towards a future where assets are utilised as services, supported by seamless processes and trust-enabled exchanges facilitated by the blockchain. The Internet-of-Things (IoT) is already used in Blockchain 3.0 as an open-source dis- tributed ledger (e.g., IOTA, NEO, EOS) and has presented many unique alternatives for storing transactions with a potential for higher scalability (by using Tangle) over Block- chain 1.0 based distributed ledgers (such as Bitcoin). However, the interest in some of the early crypto projects seems to be dying down. In the Fig. 5 we can see the research interest of the most promising projects from the pre-2018 bull run (see Fig. 5 below). One solution that seems to be under consideration is to rename existing projects (e.g., NEO is renamed to N3—with a promise of a better Blockchain).5 IOTA is keeping its name but evolving into a new blockchain called Crysalis.6 Although the idea of IoT- based crypto is undeniably valuable, further research is required to determine how IoT technologies would resolve the main problem of Blockchain 1.0, namely the (i) speed of transactions, and the (ii) security risk from quantum computers (Routray et al. 2017;

Page 15 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 NIST 2022a, 2022b, 2022c; Bennett and Brassard 1984; Gyongyosi and Imre 2020; Shor 1997). For the first part of the objective, the IOTA project can process around 500–800 transactions per second. Many faster blockchains like Solana can process 50,000 trans- actions per second. However, Solana and other Blockchain 2.0 are run by validators or entirely by volunteers. In other words, random people making impossible to guarantee that the network is altogether reliable. IOTA and other Blockchain 3.0 technologies are run by IoT systems, which can be considered reliable if the devices are secure. Secu- rity and reliability are necessary for technological adoption in critical infrastructure, and NHS supply chains can benefit from improved security that comes with Blockchain technologies. Still, scalability is a significant concern for the adoption of Blockchain 1.0. In other words, at present, Blockchain 1.0 can process up to seven cryptographic hash function computations per second and has a confirmation time of 15 min. In comparison, Visa processes around 1,700 transactions per second on average (based on a calculation derived from the official claim of over 150 million daily transactions). The potential for Blockchain adoption is there but is currently bottlenecked by scalabil- ity. Another obstacle to the adoption of blockchain is the energy demand and the cost Most Blockchain 1.0 (Bitcoin) and 2.0 (Ethereum) come with heavy fees, while Block- chain 3.0 (e.g., IOTA) can have zero fees. Zero fees are possible because IoT devices can communicate autonomously and send verified messages, enabling full automation of decentralised crypto, and future versions can make nano payments possible. The main problem with IoT Blockchains is the security of IoT devices. Until these devices are secure, it is difficult to see mass adoption of IoT-based crypto. The IOTA project has been in the cryptocurrency markets for a long time (in crypto terms) and still hasn’t picked up in price or mass adoption. The increased adoption of IoT in health services seems inevitable (Farahani et  al. 2020; Piya et al. 2022; Aldahiri et al. 2021; Rastogi et al. 2021; Banerjee et al. 2020; Jayavel et  al. 2017) because IoT offers increased efficiency at a reduced amount of Fig. 5  Trends in interest for early (pre-2018) crypto projects vs interest in cryptocurrencies in general

Page 16 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 time spent, which appears to be what the NHS needs, but the value of the low cost of IoT comes at risk (Beavers et al. 2019; Feng et al. 2022; Digital 2014). To reduce costs and provide the required support, the NHS must automate some essential data col- lection and monitoring, freeing skilled staff to focus on patient safety and patient ser- vice. This IoT automation in national critical infrastructure must come with increased (or at least matched) security to the traditional legacy IT systems (Ani et al. 2019; Jalali et al. 2019; Crawford and Sherman 2018), and there are various solutions for improved cybersecurity (Russell and Duren 2016; Roopak et al. 2019; Latvala et al. 2020; Abie and Balasingham 2012; Brass et  al. 2018; Ayad et  al. 2019; Ahmad and One of the leading crypto projects that could benefit NHS is the ‘VeChain’ project, which resolves many of the existing supply chain issues (Dubois et al. 2004; Mentzer et al. 2001; Zheng and Albert 2019; Qu et al. 2010; Sukati et al. 2012; Dotoli et al. 2005; Manthou et al. 2004; Cigolini et al. 2004; Shaw et al. 2017; Fatorachian and Kazemi 2021; Beamon 2005; Boyson and Corsi 2009; Liao et al. 2017; Azzi et al. 2019; Jayaram and Tan 2010; Sachdev 2019; Ben-Daya et al. 2019; Yen et al. 2004; Martínez-Olvera et al. 2006; Bozarth et al. 2009; Frohlich and Westbrook 2001; Chowdhury et al. 2021; Shao et al. 2021; Bär et al. 2018; Leng and Chen 2012; Heckmann et al. 2015; Cigo- lini et al. 2004; Strader et al. Dec. 1999; Schnetzler et al. Jan. 2007; Sakka et al. 2011; Lu et al. 2013; Jackson 2014; Dutta and Mitra 2021; Caiado et al. 2021; Ivanov 2010; Royce 2014; Perez-Franco 2010; Nikolopoulos et al. 2021; Pramatari et al. 2009; Pra- jogo and Olhager 2012; Vickery et  al. 2003; Moore et  al.), especially the software supply chain, which has many areas of current work, including the Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) (NTIA, “SBOM at a Glance” 2021; Wiesner 2022; Meyers 2022; Alrich 2022a; NTIA 2021), the Vulnerability Exploitability Exchange (VEX) (Alrich 2022b; Springett 2023; VEX 2022), and many other research efforts. The ‘VeChain’ project addresses many of these long-standing areas of concern and is already opera- tional. Still, it would be interesting to have even more automated, machine-controlled supply chains in the future. For that, we have a very different set of Blockchain solu- tions—based on IoT systems (Sachdev 2019; Ishmaev 2019; Chanson et al. Sep. 2019; Mozumder et al. 2022; Chamola et al. 2020; Javaid et al. 2020; Nguyen and Ali 2019; Bajoudah et al. 2019). Using existing IoT Blockchain solutions in the NHS-specific requirements, multiple healthcare functions can be performed simultaneously. The main concern is the lack of interoperability. Designing specific solitons individually and rolling out such solu- tions piecemeal could result in a lack of interoperability between one NHS trust and another, or even one hospital and another in the same trust. The expected outcome of such blockchain solutions is an interoperable of-the-shelf solution explicitly tested for compatibility with existing NHS systems. In addition, by using established IoT Blockchains solutions, the expected out- comes are resolutions to some challenging philosophical questions around the use of IoT in NHS, such as issues around data ownership. Since IoT Blockchains oper- ate as decentralised systems, with cryptographic hashing of data in blocks, this will resolve whether the data belongs to patients, the NHS, and the technology providers. By storing personal data in Blockchain Cloud solutions, such as the NuNet Cloud,

Page 17 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 a centralised authority won’t own the data, and sharing of the data, or alternative uses and analysis, could only be achieved by a consensus of the Blockchain validator nodes. Depending on what Blockchain is used, this could be many validator nodes. Decentralised finance (DeFi) is built upon automated protocols that offer financial services. DeFi solutions bring numerous advantages compared to traditional finance, including faster transaction speeds, improved transparency, interoperability, and immu- tability. However, these strengths also give rise to specific weaknesses. In other sections of this review, we explore the challenges of ensuring compliance with anti-money laun- dering processes when conducting cross-border transactions at high speeds. The rapid pace of DeFi operations often comes at the expense of non-compliance. Although this issue is expected to be resolved in the future, it poses a significant hurdle for widespread adoption, particularly on a national level, as observed in the case of El Salvador. In 2023, several significant DeFi protocols have emerged, such as Aave, Compound, Curve Finance, Synthetix, PancakeSwap, Kyber Network, Uniswap, and others. While new protocols are gaining momentum, Uniswap remains the most popular decentralised exchange. The collapse of centralised exchanges, including FTX, has created new market potential for decentralised exchanges. Nevertheless, questions persist regarding the level of decentralisation achieved by some of these platforms. As DeFi continues to evolve, striking a balance between speed, compliance, and decen- tralisation becomes crucial for sustainable growth. Overcoming the challenges associ- ated with regulatory compliance will facilitate the broader adoption and integration of DeFi into existing financial systems. Addressing concerns about the degree of decentral- isation within decentralised exchanges will foster greater trust and confidence among users. By navigating these complexities, the DeFi ecosystem can unlock its full potential and reshape the accessibility of financial services, empowering individuals worldwide with greater financial inclusivity and autonomy. Centralised exchanges faced significant challenges in 2022, and without comprehensive regulatory oversight, they appear poised to repeat past mistakes. While surviving cen- tralised exchanges like Binance, Coinbase, Kraken, and KuCoin, among others, claim to adhere to compliance standards, the absence of effective oversight is evident, with lim- ited exceptions in the United States, Australia, and New Zealand. In Australia and New Zealand, certain major exchanges are subject to regulatory measures that encompass ATO (Australian Taxation Office) and AML (Anti-Money Laundering) compliance, as well as KYC (Know Your Customer) protocols. Coinbase in the United States operates under a similar regulatory framework. However, the effectiveness of such compliance measures warrants further examination in a separate article. In this piece, we focus on the level of compliance necessary for crypto assets to be fully compliant. The issue of partial compliance can be perplexing, as classifying inherently risky assets as compliant creates opportunities for fund managers to include these assets within seemingly secure financial products, such as pension funds. This scenario raises con- cerns about a potential future parallel to the subprime mortgage crisis 2008. Thus, it

Page 18 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 is crucial to thoroughly assess and understand the actual compliance status of crypto assets to avoid misleading categorisations that may inadvertently contribute to the crea- tion of unstable financial products. Implementing robust regulatory measures and ensuring effective oversight are imper- ative steps towards fostering transparency and safeguarding investors’ interests within the cryptocurrency landscape. Striking a balance between innovation and regulation will be critical in building a sustainable and resilient financial ecosystem that mitigates risks and instils confidence among market participants. Layer 1s and 2s, non‑fungible tokens (NFTs), and the Metaverses Blockchains such as Bitcoin and Ethereum are called Layer 1 in decentralised terminol- ogy. Alongside these Blockchains, there are Layer 2 protocols that can be utilised in con- junction, enhancing the capabilities of the underlying Blockchain. Examples of Layer 2 protocols include Arbitrum and Optimism. Within the Metaverse landscape, many plat- forms operate as Layer 2 protocols built upon existing Blockchains. For instance, Decen- traland (MANA), ApeCoin (APE), Axie Infinity (AXS), the Sandbox (SAND), Enjin Coin (ENJ), Gala (GALA), Render (RNDR), and Metahero (HERO) are all powered by the Ethereum (ETH) blockchain. Theta (THETA) initially started as an ERC-20 token but subsequently transitioned to its native THETA token. Theta utilises two tokens: THETA for governance and TFUEL for utility. Stacks (STX) is one of the few layer-1 blockchains in the Metaverse ecosystem. Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs) represent unique pieces of art, digital content, or media within the Metaverse. These tokens enable trading and serve as a means of storing value. However, it is essential to note that not all NFTs have proven to possess the anticipated value that some investors had hoped for. To summarise the information presented: The Metaverse ecosystem encompasses a diverse range of blockchains, protocols, and tokens, providing unique opportunities for participation and engagement within virtual Crypto bridges and oracles Blockchain bridges enable the movement of assets from one Layer 1 to another Layer 1 or from Layer 1 to Layer 2 and the reverse. Some of the most famous bridges in 2023 include Hop Exchange, Orbiter, Rango Exchange, cBridge, xPollinate, AllBridge, and

Page 19 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 many others. Many of the major hacks that resulted in a significant loss of Crypto in 2022 were based on cyber-attacks on Crypto bridges. While Bridges resolve interoper- ability issues across chains, Oracles (such as Chainlink) enable cross-chain communica- tion and intelligent contracts to execute on different Blockchains. Cryptocurrency digital wallets can be classified into three main categories. The first cat- egory comprises safe storage tricky wallets, where cryptocurrencies are securely stored on a personal device. Examples of such wallets include Ledger and Trezor. The second category consists of hot wallets, such as Metamask and TrustWallet, software-based wallets typically accessed through internet-connected devices. Lastly, there are exchange wallets, such as Coinbase Wallet, provided by Centralised exchanges. Considering the recent collapses of Centralised exchanges, it becomes challenging to understand why individuals still choose to store their cryptocurrencies in exchange wal- lets. Users may prefer the convenience of having someone else manage the day-to-day operations of their savings and finances. However, this reliance on Centralised exchanges highlights the importance of implementing robust regulations to ensure the security and integrity of these platforms. To summarise the information presented: Classifying cryptocurrency wallets into these categories provides users with various options to suit their preferences for security, accessibility, and management of their digi- tal assets. It is crucial to weigh the advantages and risks associated with each type of wal- let to make informed decisions regarding the storage and protection of cryptocurrencies. Lessons to be learned from the past errors: the two cases of FTX and Terra Luna FTX was a centralised cryptocurrency exchange, providing crypto derivatives and lever- age trading services. Still, the primary use for centralised exchanges is to enable custom- ers to buy and exchange different cryptocurrencies. The main problems resulting from the collapse of FTX also apply to all other centralised cryptocurrency exchanges cur- rently in operation. Cryptocurrency exchanges are not regulated, which leads to indi- viduals taking risks without the approval of the asset owners, which is an oversimplified description of why centralised cryptocurrency exchanges should not be allowed to oper- ate without regulations. Individual savers are not always keen on keeping their assets on a USB drive or writing the private keys on a piece of paper, which, if lost, would result in the loss of their savings. Hence, many small crypto savers use centralised cryptocurrency exchanges (such as FTX) to store their crypto savings and earn interest—similarly to the traditional banking system. Despite all the warning signs, individual savers are still lock- ing their crypto savings in unregulated centralised exchanges. This presents three options to the UK government and all other governments

Page 20 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 1.	 The first is to create standards and regulations for cryptocurrencies because as of today (08 Jan 2023), we have 22,228 different cryptos (i.e., crypto projects) and 534 crypto exchanges, with a market cap of $824,468,428,103 and 24 h trade volume of $16,374,071,351 (CoinMarketCap 2023). None of the trades are regulated in the UK, nor most other countries. 2.	 The second is to ban all use of cryptocurrencies, including ownership and trading, but this is unlikely to be effective because most crypto projects are run from outside of the UK, and some (e.g., Bitcoin) are decentralised. Hence, even if a global task force could be created to track and trace cryptocurrency projects and exchanges, it would be ineffective against decentralised crypto and will only push trade and own- ership into the dark economy. In addition, it is unlikely that the legal mechanisms can cope with persecuting all cryptocurrency projects and exchanges because, as we can see from the case of the XRP legal proceedings, just one point can take years to resolve. The US Government has proven that it can effectively ban crypto projects. In August 2022, the U.S. Treasury sanctioned the virtual currency mixer Tornado Cash (OFAC 2022). The Tornado Cash DAO was shut down, and its lead developer Aleksey Pertsev was arrested, but what this translates to is that the mixer’s code itself is banned for use, and it does not mean that the code has been disabled and cannot be used. It means that the Tornado Cash U.S. crypto customers are not allowed to use the mixer, at least not without permission from the U.S. Treasury. The mixer is blacklisted in the US because of its use in money laundering. However, the Tornado Cash app will continue to operate on the Ethereum blockchain exists. The critical point is that it is impossible to shut down such technology without shutting down the entire Blockchain. Since some Blockchains are decentralised, this will prove dif- ficult, and even, if possible, many new Blockchains are constantly emerging. Hence, sanctioning and banning are unlikely to be valid for completely closing all operations. 3.	 The third option is to create fully centralised Government run Blockchains, upon which open crypto projects and exchanges can be built. In this scenario, Govern- ments could control the type of projects and impose regulations and standards upon the developers and the user community. In such fully centralised Blockchains, the government could allow the development of centralised and decentralised crypto exchanges and fund or encourage the development of CBDCs (Central Bank Dig- ital Currencies) and regulated Stablecoins (cryptocurrency with a pegged value to another currency, commodity, or financial instrument). By enabling the develop- ment of a fully regulated Stablecoin, the UK Government would prevent one of the main risks for individual crypto savers: the collapse of another Stablecoin, which happened to the UST Algorithmic Stablecoin in 2022. Many of the current stable- coins are highly speculative, and at present most stablecoins are not audited or regu- lated—at least not in any meaningful way. Although Tether (USDT) has announced that it is preparing to be audited by a large accounting firm to prove the transparency of Tether, at present, USDT market reserves are not audited. As of today, Tether’s market cap is $66,268,895,618. Around $11,106,992,770 of the cryptocurrency sta- blecoins traded in the last 24 h alone. Tether (USDT) is just one of many stablecoins on the many current crypto exchanges. In the top 10 cryptocurrencies by market

Page 21 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 cap, apart from USDT, we also have the USDC (market cap of $43,922,152,193) and BUSD (market cap of $16,377,185,225). 4.	 In contrast, in ­11th place, we have DAI (market cap of $5,790,436,026). In the 41st place, we have USDP (market cap of $876,254,775). On the ­43rd place is TUSD (mar- ket cap of $846,271,617), in the ­52nd place is USDD (market cap of $707,743,989) and so on—data from the ­8th of January 2023 (CoinMarketCap 2023). From the above- listed stablecoins, USDC has reserves regularly attested but not audited. None of the stablecoins are audited. This creates a systemic risk for all cryptocurrencies, and reg- ulating the stablecoins will not only prevent future loss of savings for individual users and savers (hodlers), but it would increase the confidence in the market. Combined with a regulated crypto exchange, it would provide security and quick exit for inves- tors during times of volatility. In the final comment on CBDCs, we must point out that the view emerging from this article is not sympathetic to the values of society and economy from CBDCs. Although CBDCs would resolve many issues related to fluctuations in the price of all cryptocurrencies, the stablecoin solution could be a preferred version of a Blockchain-based currency, specifically, decentralised stable- coins. However, the collapse of UST—LUNA has exposed vulnerabilities in some of the decentralised algorithmic stablecoins. We need new solutions to address some of the vulnerabilities disclosed in 2022. 5.	 The main lesson we must learn from FTX is that without taking regulatory action, corporate malfunction and malfeasance cases will continue to dominate the crypto- currency ecosystems. Even if governments worldwide embrace the concept of com- plete monetary decentralisation (which seems highly unlikely), some crypto market elements still need to be regulated to ensure that self-governance is not replaced again with malfeasance. The collapse of FTX (which was considered one of the safest exchanges because of the public display of approval from various high-profile politi- cians), has proven that corporate malfeasance exists in cryptocurrencies on a much greater level than we are aware. To put this into perspective, if users start withdraw- ing large volumes from any of the above-listed stablecoins, it seems questionable if they will survive. That is not to say that the concept of stablecoins should be aban- doned or that the currency should be pegged to gold and not to the USD. Stablecoins provide crucial services in the crypto markets, and USD is the most traded currency. The concept seems sound, but the regulations, standards and accountancy audits are These three scenarios could be seen as opportunities for the UK Government to inter- vene and take advantage of the situation to establish the UK as the leading country in the world, that is providing a highly demanded service (which is also highly profitable), but also highly regulated, standardised, and audited according to international standards. Would this expose the UK economy to unnecessary risk? That depends on how this pro- Suppose the UK develops a new Blockchain that provides the services that companies use to build crypto projects. In that case, the risk to the UK is minimal, even if the crypto markets collapse. The value of Bitcoin dropped to its all-time lows from year 2009. The Blockchain would still charge transaction fees until the market cap goes down to zero, at

Page 22 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 which point, there won’t be any transactions, and there won’t be any cost, because there won’t be any need for maintaining the new Blockchain. Similar arguments can be made about the development of a UK crypto exchange. Regardless of the level of centralisa- tion, the code for Uniswap and many other exchanges are open and can be copied to cre- ate a new exchange without building a new code. That is precisely what SushiSwap did, gaining a significant market cap and trading volume almost instantly. Survey of Crypto use cases The use case for crypto projects depends mainly on the specifics of the project fea- tures and characteristics. Some of the most popular use cases come with questionable motives. For example, the idea that bitcoin can be considered as digital gold, or as a store of value, and that bitcoin can be used to preserve wealth and hedge against infla- tion. This use case is very debatable. There are many use cases for crypto, and below I list some realistic use cases, but the idea that a digital asset with no other purpose or a use case can replace gold, is not very convincing. It seems more likely that Bitcoin will need to be wrapped and transferred to a different chain, where the cost of transactions is much lower, and be used as a payment system, similar to SWIFT. That could be a real-world use case, and we already have the Algorand Blockchain, which is capable of handling wrapped Bitcoins, and the cost of transactions is very low, while security is high. Algorand could even enhance the security of Bitcoin. There will be many other Blockchains that can do the same function. Hence, the bitcoin community needs to start innovating because back in 2009, Satoshi presented the most innovative and secure technology, but surely, he didn’t expect this to remain the same forever. Some of the real-world use cases include: 1.	 Borderless payments without any centralised entities acting as an intermediary, 2.	 Decentralised finance for lending and borrowing, accessible to anyone and every- one that has an internet connection and knows how to use the specific blockchain– 3.	 Security and privacy of products (and services) as they move through different sup- 4.	 Authenticity verification for products and services, 5.	 Ensuring payments are processed somewhat in supply chains- with the use of smart 6.	 Buying and owning digital assets, such as gaming and collectables, can be held as 7.	 Crypto transactions can be designed to help with privacy and anonymity, creating added value for users that prefer to keep their finances private. 8.	 Crypto can be used for crowdfunding, where new funds can be raised by issuing ini- tial coin offerings (ICO) or token generation events (TGEs). 9.	 Creatives can use crypto to monetise their work. For example, digital content crea- tors can accept payments for premium content, opening a safer and cheaper envi- ronment for various artists, from dancers, tutors, and painters, to fitness instructors, digital consultants and education providers.

Page 23 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 10.	 Charitable donations, crypto can be used as a fast and secure method for transfer- ring wealth to people in need. New use cases will continue to emerge with the increased adoption of decentralised blockchain technology. One way to compare the current state of crypto is to think of web one vs web two and the emergence of web three. Web one was just a collection of data and information made available for free online. Evolution and uncertainties of the Internet: from Web1 to Web3 The internet has undergone significant transformations over the years, from the emer- gence of Web1 as the "information highway" to the interactive capabilities of Web2. However, Web2 has raised concerns regarding privacy exploitation, paving the way for the anticipated arrival of Web3, which is expected to be built on blockchain technology. The blockchain’s primary use case has already found its place in adopting blockchains within Web3. This section explores the evolution of the Internet and the uncertainties surrounding the dominance of specific platforms and cryptocurrencies. The transition from Web1 to Web2 can be likened to the shift from AOL (the initial popular web browser) to Hotmail. Similarly, Ethereum has emerged as the dominant force in the crypto world, particularly with the introduction of layer two projects like Optimism and Arbitrum. Ethereum’s upgraded blockchain, transitioning from proof of work to proof of stake, became a prominent player in 2023. However, whether Ethereum will sustain its popularity in the coming years or if another cryptocurrency will surpass it. This draws parallels to Hotmail’s decline despite experimenting with features similar The similarity between the current version of WhatsApp and the older MSN chat is quite puzzling. While WhatsApp remains popular, MSN lost many users and was even- tually abandoned. Although some argue that WhatsApp relies on mobile signals, it uses personal mobile numbers as usernames rather than a communication method. In con- trast, MSN offered the advantage of creating new and random usernames, making it seemingly more secure. This example highlights the unpredictability of platform prefer- As the emergence of Web3 unfolds, multiple platforms aim to provide similar services. Identifying the platform that will prevail in the long run is challenging. Ethereum may be the MSN in this scenario, but who will be the WhatsApp? It’s not a single platform; pro- jects like NEAR and SOL, among others, offer comparable functionalities to Ethereum. The long-term viability of crypto projects depends on their ability to deliver unique ser- vices and align with user preferences. The question arises whether Bitcoin will experience a revival with the Lightning net- work. When transmitted via the Lightning network, there is no real distinction between layer one and layer two solutions. Additionally, Bitcoin has been striving to increase the use of renewable energy and improve speed and user-friendliness for everyday transac- tions. Perhaps, there is potential for new blockchain innovations to emerge from Bitcoin. In summary, the Internet has evolved from Web1 to Web2, and the anticipated arrival of Web3 brings new uncertainties regarding platform dominance and the emergence of innovative cryptocurrencies. The future landscape of the internet and blockchain

Page 24 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 technologies remains unpredictable, as users’ preferences and advancements in various projects play pivotal roles in shaping the future of the digital landscape. This review article would not be complete without discussing the Buterin’s trilemma and how that fundamentally captures the trade-offs between security, decentralisation, speed, and the attendant risks. Some blockchains (e.g., Sol) go for speed but are more centralised; others are less centralised but often more secure. One study suggested a solution called ‘The Blockchain Quadrilemma’ but also recognised that for basic Block- chain operations ‘, Algorand can often be the right choice’, but Ethereum is recommended for ‘more sophisticated computations’ (Mogavero et  al. 2021). Another research study recommended ‘a dichotomy of algorithms between leader-based and voting-based con- sensus algorithms’ based on ‘tradeoffs … for a given distributed system’ (Altarawneh et al. 2020) It is worth mentioning that some experts recommend an ‘incentive-based role in the governance of DeFi as opposed to an enforcement-oriented role’ because we need to build new tools that enable new ‘policy options in a transnational environment hostile to formal state intervention’ (Wang 2022). Crypto is still subject to many risks for investors and users. One of the main risks for investors is that the value is highly volatile and fluctuates significantly in short periods. This makes crypto price and value extremely difficult to predict, leading to significant losses when the value drops significantly. Since crypto is also a speculative asset, inves- tors cannot be confident that the value of their investment will ever recover or go to Another risk is that no one, a government, or any financial institution regulate crypto. This is the clearest indicator that there won’t be any protection or oversight from fraud, mismanagement, or financial malfeasance. In other words, crypto investors need to be aware that they will have very little recourse if something goes wrong. Apart from these risks, one commonly discussed risk is the safety and security of blockchain technology. The common topic in media is that the underlying blockchain technology is not as secure as it was thought. The rationale for this assumption is that in the past, we had some very high-profile hacks that resulted in the theft of large amounts of crypto from exchanges and wallets. Although the latest is correct, the first is not. Bit- coin and other secured blockchains have never been hacked, the hacks happen on crypto exchanges and digital wallets that do not apply appropriate security, and most of the theft has been on crypto bridges, pools, and other instruments unrelated to the block- To explain this, in other words, the Blockchain is as secure as it has been described in the first paper written by Satoshi, but the new projects are bypassing the security requirements, often because there are no cybersecurity standards. The hacks are increas- ing, but this does not mean that blockchain technology is not secure. It means that we need cybersecurity standards for projects that use blockchain technology.

Page 25 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 Traditional finance has also been slowly developing new, faster and more secure solu- tions. The SWIFT network is very slow compared to some of the crypto solutions, and the idea of tokenised USD does seem appealing to many users, specifically traders. Cryp- tocurrencies can also solve many of the banking problems in developing countries. The ability to make payments and transfer tokens pegged with the value of USD could pro- vide solutions to much of the developed world still lacking essential banking services. Since existing payment methods like Visa or Mastercard charge service fees, it is rea- sonable to expect that some small fees would be acceptable to users. However, there is no evidence of crypto being adopted as a payment method in developing countries. Although some countries like El Salvador have adopted Bitcoin, its use for everyday pay- ment has not been adopted. Another point to make here is related to the value of Bitcoin (BTC) and private money and wallets. Although decentralised cryptocurrencies don’t hedge against short-term inflation, Bitcoin has massively outperformed gold over a dec- ade despite monetary easing/printing. Bitcoin emerged from the financial chaos in 2008, and it was presented as a solution to the centralised banking system and the high-risk practices of a few greedy financial firms that only care about profits. The cryptocurrencies only replaced one centralised set of intermediaries that are strictly regulated, with another set of centralised intermediaries that are not regulated. Despite the fall of FTX, crypto exchanges do not want to be con- trolled, and they are challenging to regulate, because they can be run from anywhere in One of the reasons for this is that consumers prefer the safety and service of third par- ties looking after their money and rarely prefer keeping their savings in a cold wallet that can be lost, damaged, or hacked, along with all the money saved. The shift from decen- tralised money to centralised exchanges just shows that people prefer the convenience of a third party looking after their money. The long-term economic utility is also questionable. Why would one coin created out of code be valued in thousands of pounds and another coin created out of code be worth zero. It is often compared with traditional securities such as stock shares, but stocks generate cash flow, and we can discount the cash flow to the present time to come up with a valuation. Another example is that a fiat currency is valued relative to other fiat currencies based on GDP, inflation, interest rates, and other data from different coun- tries. None of these valuations apply to cryptocurrencies. This means that cryptocurrencies cannot be valued because they do not have any trade fundamentals. Instead, cryptocurrencies trade purely on sentiment, and most of the price spikes are created by influencers and social media. If this trend continues, we can argue that even decentralised cryptocurrencies are just decentralised Ponzi schemes and rely on a supply of new buyers to buy new tokens at higher prices. The supply of new buyers will run out eventually. Worth emphasising here is that from the five most

Page 26 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 famous Ponzi schemes of the 2020s, are allocated to cryptocurrencies (QuadrigaCX, Terra Luna, and FTX7). What is really striking in this scenario is that the poorest usually learn last about the scheme and tend to lose the most. A clear example of this is the case of El Salvador, where they adopted Bitcoin as a legal tender, followed by credit rating agencies down- grading their sovereign credit rating. The IMF has started to cut off funding, nobody is using Bitcoin there to buy anything, and it turned out to be a disaster. Other develop- ing countries have found effective fintech solutions that do not require crypto, such as the M-Pesa in Africa, which is based on SIM card payment from a mobile phone, or We Chat Pay, a QR Code payment. Both examples have proven success in adoption and financial inclusion, with billions of users and almost no banking infrastructure invest- ment. If we compare this to Bitcoin, we are still not able to walk into a shop and buy things with Bitcoin or any of the cryptocurrencies that we have at present. It is question- able if we will ever be able to do that because of the cost of validating the transaction— it might simply not be viable to process so many transactions with the current Bitcoin mechanisms. It seems more likely that Bitcoin would need to be wrapped as a token on a different—less secure Blockchain just to be used as a currency for payment of everyday things, like coffee or beer. For crypto to be seen as a long-term value, it must provide economic utility, and at present, crypto is not providing such utility. Another problem is that in technological terms, crypto is old technology, the first block was created in 2009, and we have seen a rapid technological change since then. Most of the mobile phones from 2009 are now considered old and almost obsolete. We are still waiting for some extraordinary use case for crypto, but since it hasn’t materialised until now, the question is when it will, and would it ever happen? Currently, the crypto market is not connected to traditional markets and is relatively small. If the crypto market relates to the traditional finance, the spill-over effect must be considered. The main concern is that if the crypto market is regulated in a way that it would get supercharged and it’s allowed to create the connections between regulated finance and the crypto system, then crypto problems can become much bigger prob- lems. This would mean that people that never invested in crypto are affected by price fluctuations and crypto market risks, in the same way that investors were affected by the mortgage-backed securities in 2008. Hence, the focus in regulations should be on mini- mising the connections between the crypto market and the regulated financial system. One significant risk from cryptocurrencies to our society is gambling, including lev- eraged and other forms of trading. In this article, we focused on the crypto ecosystem and the risk and values of the technology for society and the economy—from a per- spective of improved wealth of a nation. But we also noticed that in the literature, we seem to have ignored that trading and gambling are addictions that humans have been subjected to since the early age of humanity, and the gambling market is booming in

Page 27 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 crypto. Wherever there is a demand, there will be a supply, and this needs to be regu- lated because gambling is a severe addiction. One of the more concerning discoveries in this area is that Crypto gambling is ‘distinct with regard to higher novelty seeking, higher gambling tendencies, and unique investment patterns’ (Kim et al. 2020) and this conclusion has been reached with the use of estab- lished and new Crypto specific methods, including ‘Fear of Missing Out (FoMO) scale, Temperament and Character Inventory-Revised-Short (TCI-RS), Mood Disorder Ques- tionnaire (MDQ), trait anxiety part of the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI-T), and the Korean version of the Canadian Problem Gambling Index (K-CPGI)’. Cryptocurrency trading and gambling have also been associated with mental health problems, including depression and anxiety, with the main findings confirming a direct similarity between the demographic and personality characteristics of cryptocurrency traders and gamblers (Johnson 2023). However, the study recognises that there could be ‘differences between long-term investors and short-term traders of cryptocurrency’, although, given the market uncertainty, some of the long-term investors in Terra Luna of FTX might disagree. Another recent study found that cryptocurrency trading results in ‘rise to excessive or harmful behaviour including over-spending and compulsive check- ing’, and although they identified many ‘similarities between online sports betting and day trading’, there are also some even more concerning factors, like ‘the continuous 24-h availability of trading, the global nature of the market, and the vital role of social media, social influence and non-balance sheet related events as determinants of price move- ments’ (Delfabbro et al. 2021). These examples illustrate that we have reviewed some of the leading and most recent journal papers on this topic, but this topic needs much deeper research and understand- ing from a mental health perspective. In conclusion, this article has comprehensively examined the current state of crypto- currencies and blockchains, aiming to enhance coherence, structure, and comprehen- sibility within the domain. We have shed light on the values and risks associated with these digital assets by presenting an up-to-date snapshot of the crypto landscape in 2023 and tracing its historical development from Satoshi’s pioneering work. Moreover, we have endeavoured to clarify the distinctions between cryptocurrencies and block- chain technologies, addressing pertinent research questions regarding the innovative nature of blockchain, the significant risks posed by cryptocurrencies, and the potential societal and economic benefits of pursuing these technologies. Furthermore, we have explored the varying impacts on developed and developing countries and contemplated the longevity of different blockchain projects. While acknowledging the prevalence of fraudulent schemes, we have shifted our focus to the practical applications of blockchain projects, ultimately affirming the enduring presence of blockchain technologies. Our comprehensive discussion on the value derived from blockchain projects underscores their significance while re-evaluating key risks, including a personal reflection from the author on the potential risks. The question that emerges from this review paper is, if we fast forward ten years, would all the transactions that we perform in our society be in fiat currencies, and the

Page 28 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 answer is that most probably they won’t. With the emergence of Web3, assets, money and marketplaces will become interconnected, and some of the cryptocurrencies will form part of these new digital assets, but would that be Bitcoin, or some of the other 22,250 cryptos that are in circulation today, that is difficult to predict. What also becomes clear is that regulation would eliminate many of the cases of cor- porate malfeasance. Regulations will most likely also remove many current use cases for crypto. Much of the recent hype around crypto is around the lack of regulations, and when regulations are applied, the promise of getting rich from crypto will certainly start to weaken. With regulations, crypto projects will have to start making checks (KYC) on who their customers are, and this argument for regulations killing the crypto is espe- cially strong for cryptocurrencies that are created with no actual use case and based purely on the promise of making a great deal of money for early investors. Once regula- tions are created, these cryptos will be out of the picture. Most of the crypto projects are almost certainly not compliant with the derivatives or either security regulators. Crypto has been operating in a very grey area, where different crypto project is con- sidered as commodities, and because of that, crypto exchanges do not need to register with the federal government and be subject to regulation. This debate has been ongoing for far too long. The issue of whether crypto is a commodity or crypto is a security is not the main point of concern. The main concern is not the naming but whether crypto is subject to regulation, and from this perspective, it makes sense to call all crypto assets securities, which will mean that all crypto is subjected to robust oversight. The issue is that, if that happens, most crypto projects won’t be able to comply, which will hurt not only the crypto industry but also the crypto investors. Given that regulations are designed to protect investors, it is uncertain if such robust approach would serve the purpose it intended to, or would it lead to a significant loss for crypto investors. A more realistic approach would be to reg- ulate crypto exchanges and ensure that exchanges are registered as investment dealers. This seems realistic and reasonable because if a crypto investor engages in a contract with a crypto exchange, where the exchange would promise a very lucrative return or some exceptional benefits that are not very realistic, there are small crypto investors that might fail for such advertisements. This makes crypto exchanges investment deadlier, and they need to be regulated. Regulators need to engage in how these exchanges keep their assets, how they get the returns, and ensure that exchanges are not taking unneces- sary risks that expose investors to risks they are unaware of or do not fully understand. The old saying in crypto is ‘not your keys, not your crypto’, and regulating the centralised exchanges, won’t even come with any disagreement from the crypto community. A final comment on investing in crypto, despite the remarkable returns some investors have benefited from, the crypto market has not matured yet, and the market—includ- ing the technology—is still evolving. There are risks, and investing in crypto comes with serious risks, and investors should approach crypto with caution. In addition, we still cannot use Bitcoin or any other Crypto to buy coffee in Costa or Starbucks, we cannot buy food in Tesco, and transactions come at a cost, while using fiat doesn’t cost.Until we can use crypto as a fiat currency in every aspect of the use cases, we won’t be able to

Page 29 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 claim that retail and commerce adoption is increasing. Even if the price of crypto goes up (or down), the use case doesn’t change much, which triggers concerns. On the other hand, the claim that Bitcoin is used for crime and money laundry has been contradicted by blockchain analysis company Chainalysis, which reported that only a very small per- centage (0.15% total of $14bl) of known cryptocurrency transactions conducted in 2021 were involved in illicit activities (Sun and Smagalla 2021). The first decentralised blockchain Crypto project that got affected by the FTX collapse Ethereum, Cardano, Dogecoin, Litecoin, Algorand, NEAR Crypto projects that remained popular with investors in the Crypto projects that were popular in the previous bull runs, and are still present in the crypto market in 2023 New and emerging forms of data Central Bank Digital Currencies Crypto mixer that has been prohibited for use by the USA Algorithmic Stablecoin – collapsed stablecoin USDT, USDC, DAI, BUSD, USDP, USDD, TUSD Stablecoins still in existence in 2023 (as of 25th of January AI based chat designed to replace the Google search engine SIM card payment from a mobile phone A QR Code payment Eternal gratitude to the Fulbright Commission for their fellowship support during my postdoctoral research. This work has been supported by the PETRAS National Centre of Excellence for IoT Systems Cybersecurity, which has been funded by the UK EPSRC [under grant number EP/S035362/1]; the Software Sustainability Institute [grant number: EP/S021779/1]; and by the Cisco Research Centre [grant number CG1525381]. Availability of data and materials All data and materials are included in the article. N/A—no code was developed. No conflict nor competing interest. Received: 25 January 2023 Accepted: 8 August 2023 Abie H, Balasingham I (2018) Risk-based adaptive security for smart IoT in eHealth. In: SeTTIT 2012, September 24–26, Oslo, Norway, 2012, Accessed: 24 March 2018. [Online]. Available: https://​pdfs.​seman​ticsc​holar.​org/​c39d/​04c6f​ Ahmad R, Alsmadi I (2021) Machine learning approaches to IoT security: a systematic literature review. Internet of Things Aldahiri A, Alrashed B, Hussain W (2021) Trends in using IoT with machine learning in health prediction system. Forecast-

Page 30 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 Alrich T (2022a) Hmm…It seems SBOMs might become big one of these days…. Blog. https://​tomal​richb​log.​blogs​pot.​ com/​2022a/​04/​hmmit-​seems-​sboms-​might-​become-​big-​one.​html. Accessed 02 Jan 2023 Alrich T (2022b) Real-time VEX. Blog, Sep. 07, 2022b. https://​tomal​richb​log.​blogs​pot.​com/​2022b/​09/​real-​time-​vex.​html. Accessed 02 Jan 2023 Altarawneh A, Herschberg T, Medury S, Kandah F, Skjellum A (2020) Buterin’s Scalability Trilemma viewed through a State-change-based Classification for Common Consensus Algorithms. In: 2020 10th Annual computing and communication workshop and conference, CCWC 2020, pp 727–736, 2020. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CCWC4​7524.​ Ani UD, Watson JDMK, Nurse JRC, Cook A, Maple C (2019) A review of critical infrastructure protection approaches: improving security through responsiveness to the dynamic modelling landscape. In: PETRAS/IET conference living in the internet of things: cybersecurity of the IoT—2019, pp 1–16. Accessed 03 Sept 2019. [Online]. Available: Aspembitova AT, Feng L, Chew LY (2021) Behavioral structure of users in cryptocurrency market. PLoS One Ayad A, Zamani A, Schmeink A, Dartmann G (2019) Design and implementation of a hybrid anomaly detection system for IoT. In: 2019 6th International conference on Internet of Things: systems, management and security, IOTSMS 2019, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp 87–92. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​IOTSM​S48152.​2019.​ Azzi R, Chamoun RK, Sokhn M (2019) The power of a blockchain-based supply chain. Comput Ind Eng 135:582–592. Bajoudah S, Dong C, Missier P (2019) Toward a decentralized, trust-less marketplace for brokered IoT data trading using blockchain. In: Proceedings - 2019 2nd IEEE international conference on Blockchain, Blockchain 2019, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., pp 339–346. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​Block​chain.​2019.​00053 Banerjee A, Chakraborty C, Kumar A, Biswas D (2020) Emerging trends in IoT and big data analytics for biomedical and health care technologies. In: Handbook of data science approaches for biomedical engineering, pp 121–152. Barrett M, Marron J, Yan Pillitteri V, Boyens J, Witte G, Feldman L (2017) Draft NISTIR 8170, the cybersecurity framework: implementation guidance for federal agencies, Maryland, 2017. Accessed: 8 March 2018. [Online]. Available: Bär K, Herbert-Hansen ZNL, Khalid W (2018) Considering Industry 4.0 aspects in the supply chain for an SME. Prod Eng Res Devel 12(6):747–758. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11740-​018-​0851-y Beamon BM (2005) Environmental and sustainability ethics in supply chain management. Sci Eng Ethics 11(2):221–234. Beavers JL, Faulks M, Marchang J (2019) Hacking NHS pacemakers: a feasibility study. In: Proceedings of 12th international conference on global security, safety and sustainability, ICGS3 2019. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICGS3.​2019.​86882​14 Ben-Daya M, Hassini E, Bahroun Z (2019) Internet of things and supply chain management: a literature review, 57(15–16). Taylor and Francis Ltd., pp 4719–4742. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​00207​543.​2017.​14021​40 Bennett CH, Brassard G (1984) Quantum cryptography: public key distribution and coin tossing. In: Proceedings of IEEE international conference on computers, systems and signal processing, New York, 1984, pp. 1–8. Accessed: 16 March 2023. [Online]. Available: https://​web.​archi​ve.​org/​web/​20200​13016​5639/​http://​resea​rcher.​watson.​ibm.​ Bouri E, Vo XV, Saeed T (2021) Return equicorrelation in the cryptocurrency market: analysis and determinants. Financ Res Boyson S, Corsi T (2017) Building a cyber supply chain assurance reference model. Accessed: 03 Aug 2017. [Online]. Avail- Bozarth CC, Warsing DP, Flynn BB, Flynn EJ (2009) The impact of supply chain complexity on manufacturing plant perfor- mance. J Oper Manag 27(1):78–93 Brass I, Tanczer L, Carr M, Elsden M, Blackstock J (2018) Standardising a moving target: the development and evolution of IoT Security Standards. In: Living in the Internet of Things: cybersecurity of the IoT—2018, Institution of Engineer- ing and Technology, 2018, pp 24 (9 pp.)–24 (9 pp.). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1049/​cp.​2018.​0024 Breidbach CF, Tana S (2021) Betting on Bitcoin: How social collectives shape cryptocurrency markets. J Bus Res 122:311– Buith J (2016) Cyber value at risk in the Netherlands. Accessed: 03 Apr 2017. [Online]. Available: https://​www2.​deloi​tte.​ Caiado RGG, Scavarda LF, Gavião LO, Ivson P, Nascimento DLM, Garza-Reyes JA (2021) A fuzzy rule-based industry 4.0 maturity model for operations and supply chain management. Int J Prod Econ 231:107883. https://​doi.​org/​10.​ Chamola V, Hassija V, Gupta V, Guizani M (2020) A comprehensive review of the COVID-19 pandemic and the role of IoT, Drones, AI, Blockchain, and 5G in Managing its Impact. IEEE Access 8:90225–90265. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ Chang MC, Park D (2020) How can Blockchain help people in the event of pandemics such as the COVID-19? J Med Syst Chanson M, Bogner A, Bilgeri D, Fleisch E, Wortmann F (2019) Blockchain for the IoT: privacy-preserving protection of sensor data. J Assoc Inf Syst 20(9):1271–1307. https://​doi.​org/​10.​17705/​1jais.​00567 Charmaz K (2006) Constructing grounded theory: a practical guide through qualitative analysis. Sage Publications Chen Y, Zhang Y, Zhou B (2020) Research on the risk of block chain technology in Internet finance supported by wireless network. EURASIP J Wirel Commun Netw 2020(1):1–11. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​S13638-​020-​01685-6/​FIGUR​ES/9 Cheng P (2022) Decoding the rise of Central Bank Digital Currency in China: designs, problems, and prospects. J Bank Chowdhury P, Paul SK, Kaisar S, Moktadir MA (2021) COVID-19 pandemic related supply chain studies: a systematic review. Transp Res E Logist Transp Rev 148:102271. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​tre.​2021.​102271

Page 31 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 Chu J, Chan S, Zhang Y (2023) An analysis of the return–volume relationship in decentralised finance (DeFi). Int Rev Econ Cigolini R, Cozzi M, Perona M (2004) A new framework for supply chain management. Int J Oper Prod Manag 24(1):7–41. Cigolini R, Cozzi M, Perona M (2004) A new framework for supply chain management: conceptual model and empirical test. Int J Oper Prod Manag 24(1):7–41 CoinMarketCap. Cryptocurrency Prices, Charts And Market Capitalizations | CoinMarketCap.” https://​coinm​arket​cap.​com/. Accessed 08 Jan 2023 Crawford D, Sherman J (2018) Gaps in United States federal government IoT security and privacy policies. J Cyber Policy Delfabbro P, King DL, Williams J (2021) The psychology of cryptocurrency trading: risk and protective factors. J Behav Dierksmeier C, Seele P (2018) Cryptocurrencies and business ethics. J Bus Ethics 152(1):1–14. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​ Dong Z, Luo F, Liang G (2018) Blockchain: a secure, decentralized, trusted cyber infrastructure solution for future energy systems. J Mod Power Syst Clean Energy 6(5):958–967. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​S40565-​018-​0418-0/​FIGUR​ES/5 Dotoli M, Fanti* MP, Meloni C, Zhou MC (2005) A multi-level approach for network design of integrated supply chains. Int J Prod Res 43(20): 4267–4287. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​00207​54050​01423​16 Dubois A, Hulthén K, Pedersen A-C (2004) Supply chains and interdependence: a theoretical analysis. J Purch Supply Dutta PK, Mitra S (2021) Application of agricultural drones and IoT to understand food supply chain during post COVID‐19. In: Agricultural informatics, Wiley, pp 67–87. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​97811​19769​231.​ch4 Eikmanns BC, Mehrwald P, Sandner PG, Welpe IM (2023) Decentralised finance platform ecosystems: conceptualisation Eisenhardt KM (1989) Building theories from case study research. Acad Manag Rev 14(4):532. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2307/​ NHS Digital (2016) Adult psychiatric morbidity survey (APMS): survey of mental health and wellbeing, England, 2014 - FAIR (2017) What is a cyber value-at-risk model? 2017. http://​www.​fairi​nstit​ute.​org/​blog/​what-​is-a-​cyber-​value-​at-​risk-​ model. Accessed 25 Dec 2017 Falchetta G, Michoud B, Hafner M, Rother M (2022) Harnessing finance for a new era of decentralised electricity access: a review of private investment patterns and emerging business models. Energy Res Soc Sci 90:102587. https://​doi.​ Fang F et al (2022) Cryptocurrency trading: a comprehensive survey. Financ Innov 8(1):1–59. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​ Faqir-Rhazoui Y, Arroyo J, Hassan S (2021) A comparative analysis of the platforms for decentralized autonomous organi- zations in the Ethereum blockchain. J Internet Serv Appl 12(1):1–20. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​S13174-​021-​00139-6/​ Farahani B, Firouzi F, Chakrabarty K (2020) Healthcare IoT. In: Intelligent Internet of Things, Springer, pp 515–545. https://​ Fatorachian H, Kazemi H (2021) Impact of Industry 4.0 on supply chain performance. Prod Plan Control 32(1):63–81. Feng X, Conrad M, Hussein K (2022) NHS big data intelligence on Blockchain applications, pp 191–208. https://​doi.​org/​ Frohlich M, Westbrook R (2001) Arcs of integration: an international study of supply chain strategies Glaser BG, Strauss AL (1967) The discovery of grounded theory : strategies for qualitative research. Routledge, Abingdon Goulding C (2002) Grounded theory : a practical guide for management, business and market researchers. SAGE Gyongyosi L, Imre S (2020) Secret key rate adaption for multicarrier continuous-variable quantum key distribution. SN Comput Sci 1(1):1–17. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s42979-​019-​0027-7 Hansen T, Delak K (2022) Security considerations for a Central Bank Digital Currency. FEDS Notes 2022(2970). https://​doi.​ Heckmann I, Comes T, Nickel S (2015) A critical review on supply chain risk-definition, measure and modeling. Omega HMT (2023) UK sets out plans to regulate crypto and protect consumers - GOV.UK. HM Treasury - Gov.UK, Feb. 01, 2023. Ishmaev G (2019) The ethical limits of blockchain-enabled markets for private IoT data. Philos Technol, 1–22. https://​doi.​ Ivanov D (2010) An adaptive framework for aligning (re)planning decisions on supply chain strategy, design, tactics, and operations. Int J Prod Res 48(13):3999–4017. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​00207​54090​28934​17 Jackson W (2014) Code, cars, and congress: a time for cyber supply chain management (1 of 3). Sonatype, 2014. https://​ blog.​sonat​ype.​com/​2014/​12/​cyber-​supply-​chain-​manag​ement-​part1/. Accessed 02 Jan 2023 Jalali MS, Kaiser JP, Siegel M, Madnick S (2019) The Internet of Things promises new benefits and risks: a systematic analy- sis of adoption dynamics of IoT products. IEEE Secur Priv 17(2):39–48. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​MSEC.​2018.​28887​80 Javaid A, Zahid M, Ali I, Khan RJUH, Noshad Z, Javaid N (2020) Reputation system for IoT data monetization using block- chain. In: Lecture notes in networks and systems, Springer, pp 173–184. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​030-​33506- Jayaram J, Tan K-C (2010) Supply chain integration with third-party logistics providers. Int J Prod Econ 125(2):262–271 Jayavel K, Nagarajan V, Sharma G (2017) An analysis of IOT test beds with application in the field of medicine and health care. Res J. Pharm Technol 10(12). https://​doi.​org/​10.​5958/​0974-​360X.​2017.​00757.0

Page 32 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 Johnson B, et al (2023) Cryptocurrency trading and its associations with gambling and mental health: a scoping review. Addict Behav 136:107504. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/J.​ADDBEH.​2022.​107504 Jorion P (1997) Value at risk: the new benchmark for controlling market risk. Irwin Professional Pub Khan AA et al (2021) QoS-Ledger: smart contracts and metaheuristic for secure quality-of-service and cost-efficient scheduling of medical-data processing. Electronics 10, Page 3083, vol. 10, no. 24, p 3083. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​ Khorshidi E, Ghezavati VR (2019) Application of mathematical modeling value-at-risk (VaR) to optimize decision making in distribution networks. SN Appl Sci 1(12):1671. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s42452-​019-​1715-6 Kim HJ, Hong JS, Hwang HC, Kim SM, Han DH (2020) Comparison of psychological status and investment style between bitcoin investors and share investors. Front Psychol 11:3230. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​FPSYG.​2020.​502295/​BIBTEX Kou G, Peng Y, Wang G (2014) Evaluation of clustering algorithms for financial risk analysis using MCDM methods. Inf Sci (n y) 275:1–12. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/J.​INS.​2014.​02.​137 Kou G, Chao X, Peng Y, Alsaadi FE, Herrera-Viedma E (2019) Machine learning methods for systemic risk analysis in finan- cial sectors. Technol Econ Dev Econ 25(5):716–742. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3846/​TEDE.​2019.​8740 Kou G, Olgu Akdeniz Ö, Dinçer H, Yüksel S (2021) Fintech investments in European banks: a hybrid IT2 fuzzy multidimen- sional decision-making approach. Financ Innov 7(1): 1–28. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​S40854-​021-​00256-Y/​TABLES/​ Kumar M, Nikhil N, Singh R (2020) Decentralising finance using decentralised blockchain oracles. In: 2020 International conference for emerging technology, INCET 2020. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​INCET​49848.​2020.​91541​23. Latvala S, Sethi M, Aura T (2020) Evaluation of out-of-band channels for IoT security. SN Comput Sci 1(1):1–17. https://​doi.​ Leng K, Chen X (2012) A genetic algorithm approach for TOC-based supply chain coordination. Appl Math Inf Sci Liao S-H, Hu D-C, Ding L-W (2017) Assessing the influence of supply chain collaboration value innovation, supply chain capability and competitive advantage in Taiwan’s networking communication industry. Int J Prod Econ Liu P, Chu P (2019) Renewables finance and investment: how to improve industry with private capital in China. J Mod Power Syst Clean Energy 7(6):1385–1398. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​S40565-​018-​0465-6/​FIGUR​ES/8 Li T, Kou G, Peng Y, Yu PS (2022) An integrated cluster detection, optimization, and interpretation approach for financial data. IEEE Trans Cybern 52(12):13848–13861. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​TCYB.​2021.​31090​66 Lu T, Guo X, Xu B, Zhao L, Peng Y, Yang H (2013) Next Big thing in big data: the security of the ICT supply chain. In: 2013 International conference on social computing, IEEE, pp 1066–1073. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​Socia​lCom.​2013.​172 Maia GC, Vieira dos Santos J (2021) MiCA and DeFi (‘Proposal for a Regulation on Market in Crypto-Assets’ and ’Decentral- ised Finance’). SSRN Electron J. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2139/​SSRN.​38753​55 Makarov I, Schoar A (2023) Cryptocurrencies and Decentralised Finance (DeFi). Bank for International Settlements, 2022, Accessed: 24 April 2023. [Online]. Available: www.​bis.​org Malhotra Y (2018) Advancing cyber risk insurance underwriting model risk management beyond VaR to pre-empt and prevent the forthcoming global cyber insurance crisis. Accessed: 22 March 2018. [Online]. Available: https://​ Manthou V, Vlachopoulou M, Folinas D (2004) Virtual e-Chain (VeC) model for supply chain collaboration. Int J Prod Econ Marishane RN, Botha RJ (2008) Empowering school-based management through decentralised financial control. 1(1): Martínez-Olvera C, Shunk D, Martinez-Olvera C, Shunk D (2006) Comprehensive framework for the development of a supply chain strategy. Int J Prod Res 44(21):4511–4528. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​00207​54060​06216​98 Mentzer JT, et al (2001) Defining supply chain management. Wiley Online Library Meyers JS (2023) Are SBOMs any good? Preliminary measurement of the quality of open source project SBOMs. In: the-​quali​ty-​of-​open-​source-​proje​ct-​sboms. Accessed 02 Jan 2023 Mikhaylov AY (2021) Development of Friedrich von Hayekʼs theory of private money and economic implications for digital currencies. Terra Economicus 19(1):53–62. https://​doi.​org/​10.​18522/​2073-​6606-​2021-​19-1-​53-​62 Mikhaylov A, Dinçer H, Yüksel S (2023) Analysis of financial development and open innovation oriented fintech potential for emerging economies using an integrated decision-making approach of MF-X-DMA and golden cut bipolar q-ROFSs. Financ Innov 9(1):1–34. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​S40854-​022-​00399-6/​TABLES/​26 Miller T, Cao S, Foth M, Boyen X, Powell W (2023) An asset-backed decentralised finance instrument for food supply chains: a case study from the livestock export industry. Comput Ind 147:103863. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/J.​COMPI​ Mogavero F, Visconti I, Vitaletti A, Zecchini M (2021) The Blockchain Quadrilemma: when also computational effective- ness matters. Proc IEEE Symp Comput Commun https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ISCC5​3001.​2021.​96315​11 Mohan V (2022) Automated market makers and decentralized exchanges: a DeFi primer. Financ Innov 8(1):1–48. https://​ Moore M, Yelgundhalli ASA, Kuppusamy TK, Torres-Arias S, DeLong LA, Cappos J (2022) A proposal for resolving software supply chain insecurities in vehicles, Uptane Standards Group. https://​uptane.​github.​io/​papers/​scudo-​white​paper.​ Mozumder MAI, Sheeraz MM, Athar A, Aich S, Kim H-C (2022) Overview: technology roadmap of the future trend of metaverse based on IoT, Blockchain, AI Technique, and Medical Domain Metaverse Activity. In: International con- ference on advanced communication technology (ICACT), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), Nakamoto S (2008) Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Decentralized Bus Rev, 21260

Page 33 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 Nguyen DD, Ali MI (2019) Enabling on-demand decentralized IoT collectability marketplace using blockchain and crowdsensing. In: Global IoT Summit, GIoTS 2019 - Proceedings, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Nikolopoulos K, Punia S, Schäfers A, Tsinopoulos C, Vasilakis C (2021) Forecasting and planning during a pandemic: COVID-19 growth rates, supply chain disruptions, and governmental decisions. Eur J Oper Res 290(1):99–115. NIST (2022a) Post-quantum cryptography PQC. https://​csrc.​nist.​gov/​Proje​cts/​post-​quant​um-​crypt​ograp​hy NIST (2022b) Post-quantum cryptography | CSRC | competition for post-quantum cryptography standardisation. Accessed 16 March 2023. [Online]. Available: https://​csrc.​nist.​gov/​proje​cts/​post-​quant​um-​crypt​ograp​hy NIST (2022c) Post-quantum cryptography | CSRC | selected algorithms: public-key encryption and key-establishment algorithms. Accessed: 16 March 2023. [Online]. Available: https://​csrc.​nist.​gov/​Proje​cts/​post-​quant​um-​crypt​ograp​ NTIA (2021) SBOM at a Glance. In: NTIA Multistakeholder Process on Software Component Transparency | ntia.gov/sbom, 2021. https://​tiny.​cc/​SPDX. Accessed 02 Jan 2023 NTIA Multistakeholder Process on Software Component Transparency Standards and Formats Working Group,” 2021 [Online]. https://​www.​ntia.​gov/​files/​ntia/​publi​catio​ns/​sbom_​forma​ts_​survey-​versi​on-​2021.​pdf. Accessed 24 Dec O’Brien P, Pike A (2015) The governance of local infrastructure funding and financing. Infrastruct Complex 2(1): 1–9. OFAC (2022) U.S. Treasury Sanctions Notorious Virtual Currency Mixer Tornado Cash. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Aug. 08, 2022. https://​home.​treas​ury.​gov/​news/​press-​relea​ses/​jy0916. Accessed 08 Jan 2023 Ozili PK (2022) Decentralised finance and cryptocurrency activity in AFRICA. Contemp Stud Econ Financ Anal 109A:3–11. Perez-Franco R (2010) A methodology to capture, evaluate and reformulate a firm’s supply chain strategy as a conceptual system. Massachusetts Institute of Technology Piya K, Au QA, Shrestha S, Singh A, Mohd TK (2022) IoT in health care industry: a promising prospect. pp 0466–0474. Prajogo D, Olhager J (2012) Supply chain integration and performance: the effects of long-term relationships, informa- tion technology and sharing, and logistics integration. Int J Prod Econ 135(1):514–522 Pramatari K, Evgeniou T, Doukidis G (2009) Implementation of collaborative e-supply-chain initiatives: an initial challeng- ing and final success case from grocery retailing. J Inf Technol 24(3):269–281. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1057/​jit.​2008.​11 Pranggono B, Arabo A (2021) COVID‐19 pandemic cybersecurity issues. Internet Technol Lett 4(2): e247. https://​doi.​org/​ Qu T, Huang GQ, Cung V-D, Mangione F (2010) Optimal configuration of assembly supply chains using analytical target cascading. Int J Prod Res 48(23):6883–6907. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​00207​54090​33076​31 Rastogi R, Singhal P, Chaturvedi DK, Gupta M (2021) Investigating correlation of tension-type headache and diabetes: IoT perspective in health care. Springer, Singapore, pp 71–91. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-​981-​15-​4112-4_4 Roopak M, Yun Tian G, Chambers J (2019) Deep learning models for cyber security in IoT networks. In: 2019 IEEE 9th annual computing and communication workshop and conference, CCWC 2019, Institute of Electrical and Elec- tronics Engineers Inc., Mar. 2019, pp 452–457. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CCWC.​2019.​86665​88 Routray SK, Jha MK, Sharma L, Nyamangoudar R, Javali A, Sarkar S (2017) Quantum cryptography for IoT: a perspective. In: IEEE international conference on IoT and its applications, ICIOT 2017. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICIOTA.​2017.​80736​38 Royce ER (2014) H.R.5793 - 113th Congress (2013–2014): cyber supply chain management and transparency act of 2014. Congress.Gov, 2014. http://​www.​congr​ess.​gov/. Accessed 02 Jan 2023 Russell B, Van Duren D (2016) Practical internet of things security : a practical, indispensable security guide that will navigate you through the complex realm of securely building and deploying systems in our IoT-connected world. 2016. Accessed: 05 Mar 2019. [Online]. Available: https://​www.​packt​pub.​com/​hardw​are-​and-​creat​ive/​pract​ical-​ Sachdev D (2019) Enabling data democracy in supply chain using blockchain and IoT. J Manag 6(1):66–83 Sakka O, Millet P-A, Botta-Genoulaz V (2011) An ontological approach for strategic alignment: a supply chain operations reference case study. Int J Comput Integr Manuf 24(11):1022–1037 Schnetzler MJ, Sennheiser A, Schönsleben P (2007) A decomposition-based approach for the development of a supply chain strategy. Int J Prod Econ 105(1):21–42. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​ijpe.​2006.​02.​004 Sebastião H, Godinho P (2021) Forecasting and trading cryptocurrencies with machine learning under changing market conditions. Financ Innov 7(1):1–30. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​S40854-​020-​00217-X/​TABLES/7 Shao XF, Liu W, Li Y, Chaudhry HR, Yue XG (2021) Multistage implementation framework for smart supply chain manage- ment under industry 4.0. Technol Forecast Soc Change 162: 120354 https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2020.​ Sharma V, Orindi V, Hesse C, Pattison J, Anderson S (2014) Supporting local climate adaptation planning and implemen- tation through local governance and decentralised finance provision. 24(4):579–590. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​ Shaw R, Takanti V, Zullo T, Director M, Llc E (2017) Best practices in cyber supply chain risk management boeing and exostar cyber security supply chain risk management interviews. Accessed 08 March 2018. [Online]. Available: Shor PW (1997) Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete logarithms on a quantum computer. SIAM J Comput 26(5):1484–1509. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1137/​S0097​53979​52931​72 Springett S (2023) Vulnerability and exploitability transparency—VDR & VEX | OWASP Foundation. OWASP, 2023. https://​ owasp.​org/​blog/​2023/​02/​07/​vdr-​vex-​compa​rison. Accessed 24 April 2023 Strader TJ, Lin F-R, Shaw MJ (1999) Business-to-business electronic commerce and convergent assembly supply chain management. J Inf Technol 14(4):361–373. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​02683​96993​44476

Page 34 of 34 Radanliev ﻿Financial Innovation (2024) 10:1 Sukati I, Hamid AB, Baharun R, Yusoff RM (2012) The study of supply chain management strategy and practices on supply chain performance. Procedia Soc Behav Sci 40:225–233 Sumah AM, Baatiema L, Abimbola S (2016) The impacts of decentralisation on health-related equity: a systematic review of the evidence. Health Policy (New York) 120(10):1183–1192. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/J.​HEALT​HPOL.​2016.​09.​003 Sun M, Smagalla D (2022) Cryptocurrency-based crime hit a record $14 Billion in 2021 – WSJ. Wall Street J. Accessed: 08 Mar 2023. [Online]. Available: https://​www.​wsj.​com/​artic​les/​crypt​ocurr​ency-​based-​crime-​hit-a-​record-​14-​billi​on-​ The Federal Reserve (2022) Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC). [Online]. Available: https://​www.​feder​alres​erve.​gov/​ Ting DSW, Carin L, Dzau V, Wong TY (2020) Digital technology and COVID-19. Nat Med Nat Res, pp 1–3. https://​doi.​org/​ van der Linden T, Shirazi T (2023) Markets in crypto-assets regulation: does it provide legal certainty and increase adop- tion of crypto-assets? Financ Innov 9(1):1–30. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​S40854-​022-​00432-8/​TABLES/2 VEX (2022) Vulnerability exploitability eXchange (VEX)—use cases. 2022. https://​www.​cisa.​gov/​sbom. Accessed 02 Jan Vickery SK, Jayaram J, Droge C, Calantone R (2003) The effects of an integrative supply chain strategy on customer service and financial performance: an analysis of direct versus indirect relationships. J Oper Manag 21(5):523–539 Wang A (2022) Rethinking the rule and role of law in decentralized finance. In: Proceedings—2022 IEEE 24th conference on business informatics, CBI 2022, vol 2, pp 118–125, 2022. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CBI54​897.​2022.​10057 Wiesner J (2023) CSAF, Not SBOM, Is The Solution. S4x22 - BSI, 2022. https://​www.​youtu​be.​com/​watch?v=​fKlW9​vOs7X​ 4&t=​504s. Accessed 02 Jan 2023 Xu M, Chen X, Kou G (2019) A systematic review of blockchain. Financ Innov 5(1):1–14. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​S40854-​ Yavin O, Reardon AJ (2021) What digital banks can learn from decentralised finance. J Digit Bank 5(3):255–263 Yen B, Farhoomand A, Ng P (2004) Constructing an e-supply chain at eastman chemical company. J Inf Technol 19(2):93– Yin RK (2009) Case study research: design and methods, vol. 5. Sage Yu M, Tsai FS, Jin H, Zhang H (2022) Digital finance and renewable energy consumption: evidence from China. Financ Innov 8(1): 1–19. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​S40854-​022-​00362-5 Zhang H, Kou G, Peng Y (2019) Soft consensus cost models for group decision making and economic interpretations. Eur J Oper Res 277(3):964–980. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/J.​EJOR.​2019.​03.​009 Zheng K, Albert LA (2019) A Robust approach for mitigating risks in cyber supply chains. Risk Anal 39(9):2076–2092. Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.